Title: Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12765v1

Published Time: Thu, 14 May 2026 00:27:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
> 2026-5-14

# Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 

Vinícius Conte Turani *,1 , Otávio Parraga *,1 , João Vitor Boer Abitante 1, Kristen K. Arguello 1, Joana Pasquali 1,Ramiro N. Barros 1, Flavio du Pin Calmon 3, Christian Mattjie 1, Rodrigo C. Barros 1,2 and Lucas S. Kupssinskü 1  

> 1MALTA, Machine Learning Theory and Applications Lab, PUCRS, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 2Kunumi Institute, Brazil,
> 3Harvard University, *Equal contribution

Large Language Models memorize vast amounts of training data, raising concerns regarding privacy, copyright infringement, and safety. Machine unlearning seeks to remove the influence of a targeted forget set D 𝑓 while preserving model performance, ideally approximating a model retrained from scratch without D 𝑓 . Existing approaches aim to achieve this by updating model parameters via gradient-based methods. However, these updates are computationally expensive, lead to irreversible weight changes, and degrade when the model is quantized for deployment. A recent alternative to changing model weights is activation engineering, where activations are changed during inference to steer model behavior. Despite circumventing weight editing, naive activation steering introduces its own failure modes, as a single global steering vector applies the same intervention to every input, leading to unintended changes in model behavior. We introduce Inference-Time Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection (GUARD-IT), a training- and gradient-free method that unlearns via input-dependent activation steering at inference time. Our method partitions D 𝑓 into semantic clusters, computes one steering vector per cluster in an offline phase, and at inference time routes each user query through a similarity gateway that selects only the relevant cluster vectors. The resulting intervention is applied as a norm-preserving rotation in the residual stream, leaving model weights untouched. Experiments on TOFU and MUSE show that GUARD-IT matches or exceeds 12 gradient-based baselines across three model scales, while being the only method to simultaneously preserve utility, suppress memorization, and avoid catastrophic collapse across all settings . GUARD-IT further supports continual unlearning without retraining, and remains effective under quantization, a scenario in which parameter-editing methods degrade. 

## 1. Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) can memorize training data, raising concerns about privacy, copyright infringement, unintended biases, and safety Liu et al. (2025); Parraga et al. (2025); Shi et al. (2025). Machine Unlearning (MU) addresses this by aiming to remove the influence of a targeted forget set D 𝑓 

while maintaining performance on a retain set D𝑟 Liu et al. (2025). Ideally, this approximates a model trained entirely from scratch on D𝑟 , eliminating both explicit memorization and distributed statistical influence of D 𝑓 . This objective is challenging because knowledge is encoded into distributed patterns across parameters, making selective removal difficult without affecting unrelated behavior Elhage et al. (2022). Most existing MU approaches rely on computationally-expensive parameter updates, such as gradient ascent on D 𝑓 Dorna et al. (2026). These methods require access to the full fine-tuning pipeline and often lead to catastrophic collapse, in which the model loses generalization and produces incoherent outputs Zhang et al. (2024a). Furthermore, their unlearning effects can be compromised or undone by subsequent model updates, compression, or quantization techniques Abitante et al. (2026). These limitations are critical in practical deployment, where models are often quantized for efficiency, resulting in discrete parameter spaces that alter optimization dynamics and can render gradient-based unlearning unstable or ineffective. Additionally, many real-world scenarios require  

> Corresponding author: Vinícius Conte Turani (v.turani@edu.pucrs.br), Rodrigo C. Barros (rodrigo.barros@pucrs.br) and Lucas S. Kupssinskü (lucas.kupssinsku@pucrs.br)
> ©2026 Kunumi Inst PUCRS. All rights reserved
> arXiv:2605.12765v1 [cs.LG] 12 May 2026 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

continual unlearning , where multiple forget requests arrive over time. Repeated parameter updates in this setting accumulate interference, exacerbating forgetting of unrelated knowledge and leading to progressive model degradation. Activation engineering (or representation engineering) is a training-free alternative to steer model behavior by injecting linear concept directions at inference time without modifying any weights Turner et al. (2024); Zou et al. (2023). If applied to unlearning, this suggests achieving directional suppression by identifying and manipulating the forget direction directly. Most approaches compute a single Steering Vector (SV) over the full target corpus, which is reasonable when the target behavior can be captured by a single compact dataset. However, when the corpus spans conflicting directions, the resulting vector averages them, losing specificity Liu et al. (2021); Yu et al. (2020). Applying a fixed SV indiscriminately can further degrade outputs on unrelated inputs Tan et al. (2024), and standard additive steering compounds the issue by perturbing the hidden state’s norm, destabilizing layer normalization and attention scaling in downstream layers Vu and Nguyen (2025); You et al. (2026). To address these challenges, we introduce Inference-Time Unlearning via Gated Activation Redi-rection (GUARD-IT) 1, a training- and gradient-free methodology for MU in LLMs. GUARD-IT operates entirely in activation space, executing unlearning as a controlled geometric transformation. GUARD-IT partitions the forget corpus into semantic clusters to precompute steering vectors in an offline phase. At inference time, a Similarity Gateway (SG) dynamically routes the user query into an input-dependent 

forget representation. Crucially, GUARD-IT applies this intervention as a pure rotation in the residual stream, preserving the original activation norm and ensuring model stability. In summary, our contributions in this paper are: 1. We formulate unlearning as a training- and gradient-free steering problem, applying norm-preserving rotations in activation space for stable, model-agnostic behavioral control. 2. We introduce a similarity gate with clustered Prototype Steering Vectors (PSVs), enabling input-dependent unlearning that adapts to the semantic content of each query. 3. We show that this inference-time architecture naturally supports continual unlearning and remains effective under quantization, where gradient-based methods degrade. 

## 2. GUARD-IT 

GUARD-IT is inspired by the linear representation hypothesis Zou et al. (2023), which stipulates that high-level concepts are encoded as directions in the model’s activation space. Following the activation engineering framework Turner et al. (2024) and prior work on inference-time intervention Li et al. (2023), we compute SVs that encode the direction of the content to be forgotten, further making use of them at inference time. Unlike prior work that uses a single global SV Rimsky et al. (2024), GUARD-IT clusters the forget corpus into semantic groups and computes one PSV per cluster. Each PSV captures the forget direction of its cluster. A SG independently controls the contribution of each PSV per input, allowing multiple PSVs to be simultaneously activated and jointly compose the final SV. This design enables both localized and compositional unlearning, avoiding common failure modes in similar intervention settings. GUARD-IT operates in two phases that are separated to keep inference-time overhead minimal. The offline phase is performed once per forget corpus and produces a set of precomputed steering material. The online phase runs at inference time and consists of a lightweight routing decision eventually followed by a single activation-space transformation. No model weights are modified at 

> 1GitHub: https://github.com/ViniTurani/GUARD-IT
> 2Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

any point. Algorithms 1 and 2 provide a concise procedural summary for both GUARD-IT phases. Appendix A illustrates the complete pipeline comprised by GUARD-IT. 

Algorithm 1 GUARD-IT: Offline Phase 

Input: Forget corpus D 𝑓 , retain corpus D𝑟 , target layer ℓ, max clusters 𝐾 max 

Output: {c𝑘 , ¯h 𝑓 𝑘 , ¯𝜌 𝑓 𝑘 }𝐾 𝑘 =1, ¯h𝑟 , ¯𝜌 𝑟  

> 1:

Embed and L2-normalize all 𝑑 ∈ D 𝑓 with ST 𝜙 (·)  

> 2:

Select 𝑘 ★ via silhouette score (Eq. 2); run K-Means → clusters {𝐶 𝑘 }, centroids {c𝑘 } 

> 3:

for 𝑘 = 1, . . . , 𝑘 ★ do  

> 4:

Extract layer-ℓ hidden states for 𝐶 𝑘 ; compute ¯h 𝑓 𝑘 and ¯𝜌 𝑓 𝑘 (Eq. 3)  

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

Extract layer-ℓ hidden states for D𝑟 ; compute ¯h𝑟 and ¯𝜌 𝑟 (Eq. 3) 

Algorithm 2 GUARD-IT: Online Phase 

Input: User input x, threshold 𝑇 , activation hℓ, coefficient 𝛼 , offline outputs above 

Output: Steered activation hℓ 

> 1:

Embed x with Sentence-Transformer (ST) 𝜙 (x) 

> 2:

Compute active clusters K ( x) (Eq. 4)  

> 3:

if |K ( x)| ≠ 0 then  

> 4:

Aggregate active PSVs: p(x) = 1

> | K ( x) |

Í𝑘 ∈ K ( x) ¯h 𝑓 𝑘  

> 5:

Compute SV v(x) via Orthogonal (Eq. 6)  

> 6:

Rescale to activation norm → ˆv(x) (Eq. 7)  

> 7:

Apply rotation at layer ℓ (Eq. 8)  

> 8:

return Steered activation h′ℓ 

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

return hℓ

2.1. Offline Phase 

2.1.1. Semantic Clustering 

Each document in the forget set D 𝑓 = {d1, . . . , d𝑁 } is embedded with a Sentence-Transformer (ST) 𝜙 

and L2-normalized. We perform 𝑘 -Means clustering to partition D 𝑓 into 𝑘 clusters. We also evaluated alternative clustering algorithms and observed no consistent differences in downstream unlearning quality, so we adopt 𝑘 -Means as the default choice due to its linear cost in all critical variables (clusters, objects, and features). The choice of 𝑘 -Means is further motivated by a geometric property of unit-norm vectors, since minimizing Euclidean distance on L2-normalized embeddings is equivalent to maximizing intra-cluster cosine similarity. Each cluster centroid represents the semantic direction of that cluster. The number of clusters 𝑘 is selected automatically by maximizing the mean silhouette score over a candidate range {2, 3, . . . , 𝑘 max }. Let e𝑖 = 𝜙 (d𝑖 ) be the embedded document d𝑖 , for a partition into 𝑘 clusters with d𝑖 ∈ 𝐶 𝑟 , we have: 

𝑎 𝑘 (𝑖 ) = 1

|𝐶 𝑟 | − 1∑︁ 𝜙 (d𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐶 𝑟 

> 𝑗 ≠𝑖

𝑑 (𝜙 (d𝑖 ), 𝜙 (d𝑗 )) , 𝑏 𝑘 (𝑖 ) = min  

> 𝐶 𝑡 ≠𝐶 𝑟

1

|𝐶 𝑡 |∑︁ 𝜙 (d𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐶 𝑡 

𝑑  𝜙 (d𝑖 ), 𝜙 (d𝑗 ) , (1) 

> 3Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

as the mean intra-cluster distance and the mean distance to the nearest neighboring cluster, respec-tively. The optimal number of clusters is then selected as  

> 𝑘 ★

= arg max  

> 𝑘 ∈ { 2,...,𝑘 max }

"

1

> 𝑁
> 𝑁

∑︁  

> 𝑖 =1
> 𝑏 𝑘

(𝑖 ) − 𝑎 𝑘 (𝑖 )

max {𝑎 𝑘 (𝑖 ), 𝑏 𝑘 (𝑖 )} 

# 

> .

(2) While a 𝑘 that is too small merges distinct topics into one cluster, a 𝑘 that is too large splits coherent documents into redundant PSVs. A higher silhouette score indicates that the forget corpus decomposes into well-defined, non-overlapping topics, enabling more precise per-cluster steering. 

2.1.2. Activation Extraction 

GUARD-IT extracts hidden-state representations from a target layer ℓ for each document in the forget 

and retain corpora, steering in the opposite direction of the forget corpus to suppress its expression in the hidden layers. For each document in a corpus D, we capture the residual stream at layer ℓ and mean-pool over all token representations to obtain the PSV of that instance; we ablate this choice against last-token extraction in Appendix B. We focus on extracting activations from intermediate layers of the residual stream, which maximize trade-off between representational richness and redirectability Arditi et al. (2024); Rimsky et al. (2024). Early layers primarily encode lexical and syntactic features and are highly sensitive to perturbations, propagating small interventions into uncontrolled downstream effects Skean et al. (2025); late layers sit close to the output distribution and leave little computational depth through which a steering signal can shape generation. Empirically, the most effective layers for GUARD-IT sit earlier than the center of the model, around the first quartile of the transformer stack, rather than at the middle layers favored by prior work on behavior steering Arditi et al. (2024); Rimsky et al. (2024) and representation-level unlearning Li et al. (2024). Behavior-steering tasks, such as refusal or sentiment, correspond to abstractions that crystallize mid-stack, whereas unlearning targets entity-level associations encoded in coarser representations earlier in the forward pass. Intervening earlier may also leave more residual depth for the model to re-integrate the perturbation coherently, reducing the gibberish-inducing side effects of aggressive late-layer steering. We provide the full per-layer ablation study in Appendix C. We construct a PSV over a corpus D by averaging the activations at layer ℓ:

¯hD = 1

> 𝑁
> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

h(ℓ)  

> 𝑑 𝑖 ,

(3) where h(ℓ) 

> 𝑑 𝑖

∈ ℝ𝐻 is the mean pooling of the activations of each token of document d𝑖 and 𝐻 is the hidden dimension size. The same computation is applied to each forget cluster to obtain ¯h 𝑓 𝑗 and to the full retain corpus to obtain a single reference direction ¯h𝑟 . We refer to ¯h 𝑓 𝑗 as the PSV of cluster 𝑗 .

2.2. Online Phase 

2.2.1. Similarity Gate 

Let x be the user input, 𝜙 (x) be the embedded user input and c𝑗 be the centroid of cluster 𝑗 . We build the set of active forget clusters whose centroids exceed the similarity threshold 𝑇 as: 

K ( x) =  𝑗 : sim (c𝑗 , 𝜙 (x)) ≥ 𝑇 . (4) 

> 4Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

If |K ( x)| = 0, i.e., no cosine similarity crossed the threshold 𝑇 , we do not steer the model away from the forget clusters, leaving the inference process as is. Conversely, if |K ( x)| ≠ 0, the input must be steered, because we are dealing with a forget-sensitive concept. To proceed with the steering process, we average the PSVs of the active forget clusters. 

p(x) = 1

|K ( x)| ∑︁ 𝑗 ∈ K ( x)

¯h 𝑓 𝑗 , (5) Vector p(x) is an input-dependent forget direction in activation space that encodes concepts according to the active forget clusters. We also experimented with similarity-weighted aggregation, in which each ¯h 𝑓 𝑗 is weighted by cosine similarity, but we observed no consistent improvements over the mean. 

2.2.2. Steering Vector Orthogonal Computation 

To convert p(x) into an SV, GUARD-IT projects the average PSV of the active forget clusters perpendic-ular to ¯hr. This procedure removes the component of the forget representation that is shared with retained content, avoiding interference with retained knowledge: 

v(x) = p(x) − p(x) · ¯h𝑟 

∥¯h𝑟 ∥2

¯h𝑟 . (6) The resulting v(x) projection opposes forget concepts while preserving the direction of the retained distribution. Appendix D ablates this choice when compared to the diff-means method Rimsky et al. (2024). 

2.2.3. Normalization 

Recent work on activation steering has shown that the direction of a hidden state carries more information than its magnitude Vu and Nguyen (2025). Magnitude changes can destabilize layer normalization and attention scaling. GUARD-IT avoids this issue by applying two complementary normalizations. 

Activation-norm scaling. The norm of steering vector v(x) depends on the distance between p(x)

and the retain PSV in hidden space. Since these distances can vary across models, it would be difficult to steer distinct models. Therefore, GUARD-IT rescales v(x) to the mean activation norm of the active corpora. Let ¯𝜌 𝑓 (x) = 1

> | K ( x) |

Í𝑘 ∈ K ( x) ¯𝜌 𝑓 𝑘 and ¯𝜌 𝑟 denote the mean L2 norms of the hidden states of the active forget clusters and of the retain set, respectively: 

ˆv(x) = v(x)∥v(x)∥ · ¯𝜌 𝑓 (x) + ¯𝜌 𝑟 

2 . (7) 

Rotation-only application. At inference time, the SV is subtracted from the hidden state and re-normalized to the original magnitude: 

h′( ℓ) =  h(ℓ) − 𝛼 ˆv(x) · ∥h(ℓ) ∥∥h(ℓ) − 𝛼 ˆv(x)∥ . (8) 

> 5Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

This ensures ∥h′( ℓ) ∥ = ∥h(ℓ) ∥: only the direction changes, leaving layer normalization and attention scaling undisturbed. Note that the activation-norm scaling places ˆv(x) in the same norm range as the model’s hidden states, so the steering coefficient 𝛼 ≥ 0 acquires a consistent geometric meaning across architectures and model sizes. The coefficient plays the same role as the steering strength in activation engineering Turner et al. (2024); Zou et al. (2023): at 𝛼 = 0 the hidden state is unchanged; at 𝛼 = 1 the full precomputed forget direction is applied, maximally displacing the hidden state away from the forget representation; 𝛼 ∈ ( 0, 1] is an interpretable range denoting the fraction of the maximum steering displacement. 

## 3. Experiments 

We evaluate GUARD-IT on the TOFU benchmark Maini et al. (2024) across the forget01 and 

forget05 splits against 12 baselines (Table 1). When applicable, we pair forget-set objectives with one of the following utility preservation strategies on the retain set: Gradient Descent (GDR), which maintains utility by optimizing the model on retained data; and KL Minimization (KLR), which constrains the unlearned model to remain close to the original on retained data. Results on the MUSE benchmark Shi et al. (2025) are reported in Appendix E. All metrics are computed following the OpenUnlearning evaluation procedure Dorna et al. (2026) on Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct, Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct, and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct. We report memorization (Mem ), which measures how much of the target set the model has forgotten; model utility ( Util ), which measures general preservation capability on the retain set; their harmonic mean ( Avg ); and gibberish rate ( Gibb ), the proportion of coherent outputs. Util and Gibb serve as proxies for catastrophic collapse Dorna et al. (2026). All GUARD-IT runs are training- and gradient-free, using default hyperparameters: extraction at the first-quartile layer, SG threshold of 𝜏 𝑔 = 0.55 , and a steering coefficient of 𝛼 = 0.2. Results for the privacy leakage metric as well as improved results after hyperparameter tuning are presented in Appendix F. The hardware used for all experiments is described in Appendix G. 

3.1. TOFU Benchmark Results 

Table 1 reports results across three model scales and both forget splits. On forget01 , GUARD-IT attains the highest Avg across all model sizes, improving over the strongest gradient-based competitor by 0.03 to 0.05 points while matching Finetuned Util on 1B and 3B. Coherent generation is preserved across all models, with Gibb between 0.83 and 0.84 , where methods such as PDU Entesari et al. (2026) collapse to 0.28 on 8B and RMU Li et al. (2024) to 0.05 on 1B. Appendix H depicts this behavior with a qualitative analysis. On forget05 , where the forget set is five times larger, GUARD-IT also reaches the best Avg on 1B (0.62 ) and remains within 0.05 of the strongest baseline on 3B and 8B, while several gradient-based methods (GA Yao et al. (2024), PDU Entesari et al. (2026), CEU Yang (2025)) collapse to Util = 0 on at least one model. Across both splits, GUARD-IT is the only method that simultaneously preserves utility, suppresses memorization, and avoids catastrophic collapse across all tested model scales. Results on the MUSE benchmarkShi et al. (2025), reported in Appendix E, confirm the same trends albeit in a different evaluation protocol. The performance profile in Table 1 reflects the significance of the SG mechanism. Through it, inputs that do not reach the similarity threshold 𝑇 are not steered, so utility remains the same as in the original model rather than degrading proportionally to the forget strength. In Appendix I, we show that SG is effective in identifying input related to the forget set, while preserving model behavior 

> 6Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

in inputs not related to the forget set. Gradient-based methods cannot replicate this behavior because their forget objective acts on the same parameters that carry retain-set behavior, which is why their utility regresses sharply as forget strength increases and, in the extreme, collapses to zero. GUARD-IT makes the trade-off between forget strength and output fluency a deployment-time choice rather than a training-time commitment, a flexibility that parameter-update methods struc-turally cannot offer without storing separate checkpoints. The overlap observed between retain and forget distributions on TOFUMaini et al. (2024) (Appendix J) reflects the synthetic nature of that benchmark, where both sets concern the same fictional-author domain. Real-world deployments, however, are expected to exhibit stronger separation. 

3.2. Continual Unlearning 

GUARD-IT is particularly suitable for Continual Unlearning scenarios, where forget data arrives incrementally, since it requires no retraining and no modification of existing vectors. Given a new corpus D+ 

> 𝑓

, the offline pipeline is applied to the new data alone and the resulting PSVs are appended to the existing ones. Sequential forget requests are isolated, as each PSV encodes only the direction of its own cluster and routing through the SG analyzes each candidate vector independently — whereas gradient-based methods require a fresh fine-tuning over the cumulative forget set (with each new request) to avoid interference between successive updates Liu et al. (2022). We evaluate the continual learning setting on TOFU Maini et al. (2024) under the forget01 and 

forget05 splits by simulating a sequential forgetting protocol. The forget set is partitioned into two equal-size subsets, and unlearning is applied incrementally. Each subset is processed in order, with each round operating on the model state produced by the preceding one, until the entire forget set has been covered. We report Mem and Util after the final round to assess whether the accumulation of successive unlearning operations degrades model performance. Table 2 reports the final-round results for the best-performing methods. Full results for all baselines are provided in Appendix K. On the 1B model, GUARD-IT achieves the best Util (0.60 on both splits), the highest Mem (0.68 on forget01 ), and the highest Avg (0.64 and 0.62 on forget01 

and forget05 , respectively). On the 3B model, GUARD-IT leads on forget01 across Util (0.67 ), 

Mem (0.66 ), and Avg (0.66 ), and ranks second on forget05 for both Util (0.66 ) and Avg (0.61 )— the first-place method on Avg , GradDiff ( 0.76 ), collapses Util to 0.00 , which means it is not a real contender. Although GUARD-IT does not dominate across all metrics, it is the only method that 

consistently maintains the Util –Mem trade-off balanced across both model scales and both splits, and does so at a fraction of the computational cost of retraining-based methods. 

3.3. Quantization Robustness 

Gradient-based unlearning is fragile under model compression. Post-hoc quantization can partially re-cover memorized content that fine-tuning had suppressed, undoing the unlearning procedure Abitante et al. (2026); Zhang et al. (2024b). These methods encode forgetting as distributed perturbations to the weight matrices, and low-precision rounding erases the fine-grained adjustments that separate an unlearned checkpoint from the original version. GUARD-IT avoids this failure since no weights are modified, so the base model and its quantized counterpart share identical parameters up to the precision cast, and the steering intervention operates on hidden-state activations produced by the quantized forward pass. 

> 7

Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70                      

> 0.10
> 0.20
> 0.30
> 0.40
> 0.50
> 0.60
> 0.70
> Forget 01%
> Mem  ( )
> 1B
> 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70
> 0.10
> 0.20
> 0.30
> 0.40
> 0.50
> 0.60
> 0.70
> 3B
> 0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70
> Model Utility ()
> 0.20
> 0.30
> 0.40
> 0.50
> 0.60
> 0.70
> Forget 05%
> Mem  ( )
> 0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70
> Model Utility ()
> 0.20
> 0.30
> 0.40
> 0.50
> 0.60
> 0.70
> Method
> GradDiff
> NPO
> RMU
> SimNPO
> UNDIAL
> GUARD
> Method
> GradDiff
> NPO
> RMU
> SimNPO
> UNDIAL
> GUARD
> Quantization
> 4-bit
> 8-bit

Figure 1 | Scatter Plots presenting the best configuration results for unlearning on TOFU. Rows correspond to forget splits (1% and 5%), and columns to model sizes (1B and 3B). Filled and unfilled markers denote 4- and 8-bit quantization, while 𝑥 and 𝑦 axes measure Util and Mem , respectively. We evaluate quantization robustness on TOFU Maini et al. (2024) forget01 and forget05 

under 4- and 8-bit round-to-nearest quantization on the 1B and 3B Llama models, comparing against the strongest gradient-based baselines from Section 3.1 (Figure 1). Baselines are trained at full precision and quantized post-hoc, whereas GUARD-IT loads the model directly in quantized form and extracts all PSV from the quantized forward pass, calibrating them to the activation distribution seen at inference. Prior work Zhang et al. (2024b) shows that unlearning robustness does not vary meaningfully across quantization schemes at these bit-widths. Appendix L shows complete quantization results. Across all settings, performance can be directly read as a Pareto trade-off in the Mem –Util plane, with the ideal region in the top-right corner. GUARD-IT consistently occupies this region across all panels, maintaining high utility while preserving memorization. This minimal shift between 4- and 8-bit shows that quantization does not materially affect its behavior. In contrast, gradient-based methods degrade under lower precision: their 4-bit variants shift away from the Pareto frontier, either losing utility or further suppressing memorization. While UNDIAL approaches outeperform GUARD-IT on Mem , it does so at a consistent utility penalty of 0.05 –0.10 .Overall, these results show that encoding unlearning in activation space, rather than in weight updates, yields a representation that is inherently stable under quantization. 

8Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 

## 4. Related Work 

Gradient-based unlearning. The dominant family of MU methods perform parameter updates on the forget set. GA Jang et al. (2023) reverses the training objective on D 𝑓 but routinely causes catastrophic collapse Zhang et al. (2024a); GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) counters this with simultaneous descent on a retain set, but the competing objectives tend to compete with each other Fan et al. (2024). NPO Zhang et al. (2024a) and SimNPO Fan et al. (2024) improve the forgetting–retention balance through instance-wise reweighting and reference-model-free normalization, while DPO-style formulations Rafailov et al. (2023) have been adapted to unlearning by treating the forget set as the dispreferred response. UNDIAL Dong et al. (2025) distills the model against an auxiliary target that suppresses forget set tokens, achieving strong forgetting without the instability of direct gradient reversal. These methods share three limitations: they require access to a training pipeline, produce irreversible changes to weights, and are vulnerable to partial undoing after subsequent fine-tuning or quantization Abitante et al. (2026). GUARD-IT addresses all these issues. 

Input-adaptive activation steering. Activation steering Turner et al. (2024); Zou et al. (2023) injects concept directions into the residual stream at inference. Early work applies a single SV uniformly Arditi et al. (2024); Rimsky et al. (2024), degrading outputs on unrelated inputs. CAST Lee et al. (2025) condition the intervention per token using the alignment between internal hidden states and a learned condition vector, and SADI Wang et al. (2025b) selects steering dimensions via contrastive activation masks. GUARD-IT extends input-conditional steering to unlearning. 

## 5. Conclusion 

We introduced GUARD-IT, a training- and gradient-free unlearning method that reformulates the unlearning problem as an input-dependent rotation in activation space. By partitioning the forget 

corpus into semantic clusters, routing inputs through a similarity gateway, and applying the resulting PSVs as norm-preserving rotations in the residual stream, our method performs unlearning without any parameter update, retraining pass, or access to the training pipeline. On TOFU, GUARD-IT matches or surpasses gradient-based baselines on the forgetting–utility frontier while solving practical issues that parameter-update methods structurally cannot. We allow the forget strength to become a continuous deployment-time knob. New forget requests are incorporated by appending vectors to an existing PSVs set, sidestepping the catastrophic forgetting that plagues sequential gradient-based unlearning. Moreover, the intervention survives post-hoc quantization, since it operates on activations produced by the forward pass of whichever deployed precision. More broadly, our results reframe D 𝑓 removal as a routing problem over a precomputed library of activation directions rather than a destructive weight rewrite. The parity between BM25 and sentence-transformer gateways (Appendix J) indicates that the routing module performs topic-level discrimination, a problem that off-the-shelf retrieval systems already solve well, opening a path toward unlearning pipelines in which forget content is managed as a dynamic, auditable, and reversible external store rather than baked into the weights irreversibly. 

5.1. Limitations Dependence on the linear representation hypothesis. The method effectiveness relies on the assumption that the forget concept is encoded along approximately-linear directions in the residual-stream activations. This assumption holds empirically for the models and benchmarks we evaluate. 

> 9Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

Still, it may weaken for concepts that are encoded non-linearly or distributed across many low-magnitude directions Park et al. (2024a). 

Benchmark scope. Our evaluation focuses on TOFU Maini et al. (2024) and MUSE Shi et al. (2025), which probe the unlearning of entity-level factual associations. Whether the same geometric intuitions transfer to unlearning tasks with qualitatively different structures, procedural knowledge, reasoning chains, multimodal associations, or adversarially crafted forget sets, remains a question to be answered in future work on inference-time machine unlearning. 

5.2. Broader Impacts 

GUARD-IT lowers the cost of complying with data removal requests under regulations such as GDPR and the EU AI Act by eliminating the need for retraining. Since unlearning is encoded as an external, versionable set of steering vectors, practitioners can inspect, update, and roll back individual forget 

requests, an unmatched level of auditability that gradient-based methods cannot offer. However, the same reversibility that enables auditability means that a motivated actor with access to the inference pipeline could trivially restore suppressed content by removing the corresponding vectors. Additionally, selective output suppression could be repurposed for censorship beyond its intended privacy and safety applications, particularly if the similarity gateway is configured to gate broad topic categories. We recommend that deployment of steering-based unlearning be accompanied by access controls on the vector store and logging of all modifications. 

Acknowledgments 

This study was financed in part by the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES) — Finance Code 001; by Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq)— Grant Number: 443072/2024-8; and by Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado do Rio Grande do Sul (FAPERGS) — Grant Number: 25/2551-0000891-3. This work was supported by Kunumi Institute. The authors thank the institution for its financial support and commitment to advancing scientific research. 

## References 

J. V. B. Abitante, J. M. Pasquali, L. F. Garcia, E. de Oliveira, T. da Silva Paula, R. C. Barros, and L. S. Kupssinskiü. Quantization-robust LLM unlearning via low-rank adaptation, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2602.13151 .A. Arditi, O. B. Obeso, A. Syed, D. Paleka, N. Rimsky, W. Gurnee, and N. Nanda. Refusal in language models is mediated by a single direction. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=pH3XAQME6c .T. Dettmers, M. Lewis, Y. Belkada, and L. Zettlemoyer. LLM.int8(): 8-bit matrix multiplication for transformers at scale. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, 2022. T. Dettmers, A. Pagnoni, A. Holtzman, and L. Zettlemoyer. QLoRA: Efficient finetuning of quantized LLMs. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, 2023. Y. R. Dong, H. Lin, M. Belkin, R. Huerta, and I. Vulić. UNDIAL: Self-distillation with adjusted logits for robust unlearning in large language models. In L. Chiruzzo, A. Ritter, and L. Wang, editors, Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8827–8840, Albuquerque, New Mexico, Apr. 2025. 

> 10 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-189-6. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.naacl-long.444. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.naacl-long.444/ .V. Dorna, A. R. Mekala, W. Zhao, A. McCallum, J. Z. Kolter, Z. C. Lipton, and P. Maini. Openunlearning: Accelerating LLM unlearning via unified benchmarking of methods and metrics. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2026. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=Gy67Zh5X1i .N. Elhage, T. Hume, C. Olsson, N. Schiefer, T. Henighan, S. Kravec, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, R. Lasenby, D. Drain, C. Chen, R. Grosse, S. McCandlish, J. Kaplan, D. Amodei, M. Wattenberg, and C. Olah. Toy models of superposition, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.10652 .T. Entesari, A. Hatami, R. Khaziev, A. Ramakrishna, and M. Fazlyab. Constrained entropic unlearning: A primal-dual framework for large language models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZtB34bQI54 .C. Fan, J. Liu, L. Lin, J. Jia, R. Zhang, S. Mei, and S. Liu. Simplicity prevails: Rethinking negative preference optimization for LLM unlearning. In Neurips Safe Generative AI Workshop 2024 , 2024. URL https:// openreview.net/forum?id=pVACX02m0p .A. Grattafiori, A. Dubey, A. Jauhri, A. Pandey, A. Kadian, A. Al-Dahle, A. Letman, A. Mathur, A. Schelten, A. Vaughan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 , 2024. J. Jang, D. Yoon, S. Yang, S. Cha, M. Lee, L. Logeswaran, and M. Seo. Knowledge unlearning for mitigating privacy risks in language models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 14389–14408, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.805. B. W. Lee, I. Padhi, K. N. Ramamurthy, E. Miehling, P. Dognin, M. Nagireddy, and A. Dhurandhar. Program-ming refusal with conditional activation steering. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Oi47wc10sm .K. Li, O. Patel, F. Viégas, H. Pfister, and M. Wattenberg. Inference-time intervention: Eliciting truthful answers from a language model. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=aLLuYpn83y .M. Li and N. Subramani. Echoes of BERT: Do modern language models rediscover the classical NLP pipeline?, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.02132 .N. Li, A. Pan, A. Gopal, S. Yue, D. Berrios, A. Gatti, J. D. Li, A.-K. Dombrowski, S. Goel, L. Phan, G. Mukobi, N. Helm-Burger, R. Laban, and D. Hendrycks. The WMDP benchmark: Measuring and reducing malicious use with unlearning. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. B. Liu, X. Liu, X. Jin, P. Stone, and Q. Liu. Conflict-averse gradient descent for multi-task learning. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’21, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2021. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713845393. B. Liu, Q. Liu, and P. Stone. Continual learning and private unlearning. In S. Chandar, R. Pascanu, and D. Precup, editors, Proceedings of The 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents , volume 199 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 243–254. PMLR, 22–24 Aug 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr. press/v199/liu22a.html .S. Liu, Y. Yao, J. Jia, S. Casper, N. Baracaldo, P. Hase, Y. Yao, C. Y. Liu, X. Xu, H. Li, et al. Rethinking machine unlearning for large language models. Nature Machine Intelligence , 7(2):181–194, 2025. P. Maini, Z. Feng, A. Schwarzschild, Z. C. Lipton, and J. Z. Kolter. TOFU: A task of fictitious unlearning for LLMs, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.06121 .C. Meng, N. Arabzadeh, A. Askari, M. Aliannejadi, and M. d. Rijke. Query performance prediction using relevance judgments generated by large language models. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. , 43(4), July 2025. ISSN 1046-8188. doi: 10.1145/3736402. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3736402 .

> 11 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

K. Meng, D. Bau, A. Andonian, and Y. Belinkov. Locating and editing factual associations in GPT. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 17359–17372. Curran As-sociates, Inc., 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/ 6f1d43d5a82a37e89b0665b33bf3a182-Abstract-Conference.html .K. Park, Y. J. Choe, Y. Jiang, and V. Veitch. The geometry of categorical and hierarchical concepts in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01506 , 2024a. K. Park, Y. J. Choe, and V. Veitch. The linear representation hypothesis and the geometry of large language models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024b. O. Parraga, M. D. More, C. M. Oliveira, N. S. Gavenski, L. S. Kupssinskü, A. Medronha, L. V. Moura, G. S. Simões, and R. C. Barros. Fairness in deep learning: A survey on vision and language research. ACM Computing Surveys , 57(6):1–40, 2025. G. Penedo, H. Kydlíček, L. B. allal, A. Lozhkov, M. Mitchell, C. Raffel, L. Von Werra, and T. Wolf. The fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the finest text data at scale. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 30811–30849. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. doi: 10. 52202/079017-0970. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/file/ 370df50ccfdf8bde18f8f9c2d9151bda-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.pdf .R. Rafailov, A. Sharma, E. Mitchell, C. D. Manning, S. Ermon, and C. Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HPuSIXJaa9 .N. Reimers and I. Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks. In K. Inui, J. Jiang, V. Ng, and X. Wan, editors, EMNLP/IJCNLP (1) , pages 3980–3990, Hong Kong, China, Nov. 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 978-1-950737-90-1. URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/ db/conf/emnlp/emnlp2019-1.html#ReimersG19 .H. Reisizadeh, J. Jia, Z. Bu, B. Vinzamuri, A. Ramakrishna, K.-W. Chang, V. Cevher, S. Liu, and M. Hong. BLUR: A bi-level optimization approach for LLM unlearning. In V. Demberg, K. Inui, and L. Mar-quez, editors, Proceedings of the 19th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 7043–7058, Rabat, Morocco, Mar. 2026. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-380-7. doi: 10.18653/v1/2026.eacl-long.331. URL 

https://aclanthology.org/2026.eacl-long.331/ .N. Rimsky, N. Gabrieli, J. Schulz, M. Tong, E. Hubinger, and A. Turner. Steering llama 2 via contrastive activation addition. In L.-W. Ku, A. Martins, and V. Srikumar, editors, Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 15504–15522, Bangkok, Thailand, Aug. 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.828. URL 

https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.828/ .S. Robertson and H. Zaragoza. The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and beyond. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval , 3:333–389, 09 2009. doi: 10.1561/1500000019. W. Shi, J. Lee, Y. Huang, S. Malladi, J. Zhao, A. Holtzman, D. Liu, L. Zettlemoyer, N. A. Smith, and C. Zhang. MUSE: Machine unlearning six-way evaluation for language models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=TArmA033BU .O. Skean, M. R. Arefin, D. Zhao, N. Patel, J. Naghiyev, Y. LeCun, and R. Shwartz-Ziv. Layer by layer: Uncovering hidden representations in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02013 , 2025. D. Tan, D. Chanin, A. Lynch, B. Paige, D. Kanoulas, A. Garriga-Alonso, and R. Kirk. Analysing the generalisation and reliability of steering vectors. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:139179–139212, 2024. 

> 12 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

N. Thakur, N. Reimers, A. Rücklé, A. Srivastava, and I. Gurevych. BEIR: A heterogenous benchmark for zero-shot evaluation of information retrieval models. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks , 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08663 .A. M. Turner, L. Thiergart, G. Leech, D. Udell, J. J. Vazquez, U. Mini, and M. MacDiarmid. Steering language models with activation engineering, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10248 .H. M. Vu and T. M. Nguyen. Angular steering: Behavior control via rotation in activation space. In ICML 2025 Workshop on Reliable and Responsible Foundation Models , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=uAfzFV7mv2 .Q. Wang, J. P. Zhou, Z. Zhou, S. Shin, B. Han, and K. Q. Weinberger. Rethinking LLM unlearning objectives: A gradient perspective and go beyond. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=huo8MqVH6t .W. Wang, J. YANG, and W. Peng. Semantics-adaptive activation intervention for LLMs via dynamic steering vectors. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025b. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=8WQ7VTfPTl .B. Yang. CE-U: Cross entropy unlearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01224 , 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2503.01224 .P. Yang, Q. Wang, Z. Huang, T. Liu, C. Zhang, and B. Han. Exploring criteria of loss reweighting to enhance LLM unlearning. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. URL https:// openreview.net/forum?id=mGOugCZlAq .Y. Yao, X. Xu, and Y. Liu. Large language model unlearning. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=8Dy42ThoNe .Z. You, C. Deng, and H. Chen. Spherical steering: Geometry-aware activation rotation for language models, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.08169 .T. Yu, S. Kumar, A. Gupta, S. Levine, K. Hausman, and C. Finn. Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. In 

Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546. R. Zhang, L. Lin, Y. Bai, and S. Mei. Negative preference optimization: From catastrophic collapse to effective unlearning. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024a. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=MXLBXjQkmb .Z. Zhang, F. Wang, X. Li, Z. Wu, X. Tang, H. Liu, Q. He, W. Yin, and S. Wang. Catastrophic failure of llm unlearning via quantization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.16454 , 2024b. A. Zou, L. Phan, S. Chen, J. Campbell, P. Guo, R. Ren, A. Pan, X. Yin, M. Mazeika, A.-K. Dombrowski, S. Goel, N. Li, M. J. Byun, Z. Wang, A. T. Mallen, S. Basart, S. Koyejo, D. Song, M. Fredrikson, Z. Kolter, and D. Hendrycks. Representation engineering: A top-down approach to ai transparency. ArXiv , abs/2310.01405, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263605618 .

## A. Pipeline Illustration 

Figure 2 provides a comprehensive visual overview of the GUARD-IT pipeline, illustrating both the offline and online phases of the proposed method. The offline phase comprises semantic clustering of the forget corpus, extraction of per-cluster pre-steering vectors, and computation of the retain 

reference vector, all performed only once and prior to deployment. The online phase shows how an incoming query is embedded and compared against cluster centroids via the similarity gate, with the resulting routing decision triggering either vanilla inference or the full sequence of steering operations, vector composition, orthogonal projection, activation-norm rescaling, and norm-preserving rotation at the selected transformer layer.   

> 13 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 𝒟 f
> Cluster 1
> ⋯
> Cluster k
> Ac  va  on
> extrac  on
> layer ℓ
> 𝒟 r
> offl ine phase - precomputed
> Input x
> no match
> Vanilla model
> match
> Steered model
> h
> PSV
> online phase
> Cluster 2
> SV computa  on
> Ac  va  on-norm scaling
> Rota  on &
> Coe ff steering
> Semantic
> Clustering
> Similarity
> Gate
> k
> p(x)
> - r
> h
> - r

Figure 2 | Overview of the GUARD-IT pipeline. The offline phase clusters the forget corpus and extracts PSVs. The online phase routes users’ inputs through the SG and applies steering only when the question concerns the forget corpus. 

## B. Token Position 

GUARD-IT extracts one hidden-state representation per input document for PSV computation. We compare three aggregation strategies: last token ( tokpos=-1 ), mean pooling ( tokpos=mean ), and max pooling ( tokpos=max ). Figure 3 presents the full 𝛼 sweep at a fixed layer for Llama 3.2 1B. As shown in Figure 3, tokpos=max reaches the best trade-off between Avg and Util among the three strategies, but this comes at the cost of model collapse, since Gibb drops sharply as 𝛼 increases, producing incoherent outputs in the regime where its memorization suppression is strongest. The remaining analysis, therefore, focuses on tokpos=-1 and tokpos=mean , which represent the two viable and qualitatively distinct regimes. The difference between them follows from how causal language models organize token-level representations. In decoder-only transformers, the last non-padding token aggregates the full causal context, and its residual stream state is directly mapped to output logits. This makes it the most generation-critical position: perturbations applied there propagate directly into the next-token distri-bution. Consistent with this, steering along a PSV extracted from the last token produces a smooth and approximately linear improvement in forgetting as 𝛼 increases. tokpos=-1 maintains stable fluency over a wide range of coefficients, with Gibb remaining above acceptable levels ( ≳ 0.7) even at higher 

𝛼 . This enables controlled trade-offs and makes tokpos=-1 suitable for regimes requiring stronger interventions. In contrast, mean pooling aggregates representations across all tokens, diluting the generation-aligned signal of the final position. This produces stronger forgetting at low 𝛼 , reaching competitive overall performance early in the sweep. However, this comes at the cost of a much narrower stability region: Gibb degrades rapidly as 𝛼 increases, falling below acceptable levels at relatively small coefficients. As a result, tokpos=mean is most effective in low-𝛼 regimes, but offers limited headroom for further steering. A separate effect explains why tokpos=mean at layer 0 yields competitive results. At layer 0, before attention, token representations are context-free and correspond to static input embeddings. Mean pooling at this depth produces an average embedding that captures the document’s lexical identity without contextual mixing. Prior work shows that early transformer layers encode lexical information in a stable and approxi-            

> 14 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Avg
> Avg
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Gibb
> Coeff sweep by token_position | Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct | layer=8 | threshold=0.5 | seed=0
> token_position
> last max mean

Figure 3 | Effect of token position as a function of 𝛼 (Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct): last (-1) , max , mean .Fixed: forget01 , layer 4, threshold 0.5, seed 0. Model utility was approximately constant ( 0.598 ) and is omitted. mately linear subspace Li and Subramani (2025), making this direction consistent across documents within the same forget cluster. The resulting PSV is less precise than one extracted from intermediate layers, but still sufficient to activate forgetting at larger 𝛼 , and robust to surface-form variation. This is consistent with the BM25–sentence-transformerRobertson and Zaragoza (2009) parity observed in Appendix J, where both operate at a coarse, topic-level granularity. Finally, the collapse observed at late layers under tokpos=mean is consistent with the linear representation hypothesis Park et al. (2024b): as representations converge toward the output distri-bution, the separation between semantic and generative subspaces diminishes, making even smooth interventions disruptive. Overall, tokpos=mean reaches strong forgetting at low 𝛼 and is preferred when maximizing Mem 

under tight constraints on the coefficient. However, its usable range is limited (typically 𝛼 ≲ 0.4)due to early fluency degradation. In contrast, tokpos=-1 requires larger 𝛼 to achieve comparable forgetting, but provides a wider stable regime and finer control over the Mem –Gibb trade-off. In practice, tokpos=mean pairs well with selection criteria that enforce a minimum fluency threshold, while tokpos=-1 is preferable when robustness across a broad 𝛼 range is required. 

## C. Layers and Coefficients 

This appendix characterizes how the choice of intervention layer and steering coefficient 𝛼 jointly determine the Mem –Util trade-off. Following the literature on activation engineering Rimsky et al. (2024); Turner et al. (2024); Zou et al. (2023), we sweep 𝛼 ∈ [ 0.0, 1.0] across different layers on the 

forget01 split. Figure 4 shows the results for Llama 3.2 1B Instruct. Two patterns are visible in the sweep. First, as 𝛼 increases, memorization suppression increases monotonically across all tested layers, while model utility remains essentially static. This decoupling follows directly from the SG: the steering intervention only fires when the input falls within the semantic scope of one or more forget clusters, so retain-distribution queries bypass the transformation                       

> 15 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 0246810 12 14
> Layer
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> Avg
> token_position = mean | RT=0.55
> 0246810 12 14
> Layer
> 0.55
> 0.60
> 0.65
> 0.70
> 0.75
> 0.80
> 0.85
> 0.90
> Gibb
> Gibberish | token_position = mean | RT=0.55
> coeff ( )
> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.8 1.0

Figure 4 | Average score ( Avg ) and Gibberish ( Gibb ) across layers(Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct, forget01 ). Fixed: orthogonal method, 𝛼 = 1.0 to 0.1, threshold 0.55 , toke_pos mean, seed 0. entirely. The coefficient 𝛼 controls the strength of the intervention, but the set of inputs affected is determined upstream by the gate (Appendix J). Second, layers around the first quartile of the transformer stack dominate the trade-off frontier, yielding the steepest reduction in Mem per unit of 𝛼 (layers 4–8 in the figure). This corroborates the layer-selection intuition discussed in §2.1.2 and aligns with prior activation steering literature Rimsky et al. (2024); Zou et al. (2023). The sweep also exposes a practical advantage of GUARD-IT over gradient-based baselines: un-learning strength is a continuous, inference-time knob. A practitioner can select 𝛼 at deployment without retraining or storing multiple model checkpoints. The same set of PSVs serves the entire trade-off curve, and the choice can even be made per query. Parameter-update methods commit to a single position on the Mem –Util curve at training time and require a full optimization run to reach a different one. The interaction between layer choice and token position strategy is analyzed separately in Ap-pendix B. 

## D. Steering Vector Computation Methods 

GUARD-IT supports two methods for combining forget and retain PSVs into a SV: diff-means and 

orthogonal . The original diff-means formulation Rimsky et al. (2024) averages the difference in residual-stream activations between paired positive and negative examples of a behavior. In the unlearning setting, forget and retain documents are not naturally paired, so we adapt the method by taking the difference between the corpus-level PSVs: 

v(x) = p(x) − ¯h𝑟 . (9) The orthogonal method, defined in Eq. 6, projects the forget PSV perpendicular to the retain PSV, removing the component shared with retained content. We compare both methods across the full 𝛼 

sweep at fixed layer and threshold (Figure 5). The two methods differ in how much of the retain distribution they encode. The diff-means vector is defined relative to ¯h𝑟 , so it retains components shared between the forget and retain distributions. These shared dimensions overlap with features responsible for fluent generation, because LLM representations superpose multiple features within the same subspace rather than encoding them in orthogonal directions Elhage et al. (2022). Steering along the diff-means direction, therefore, perturbs            

> 16 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Avg
> Avg
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Gibb
> Steering method | Llama-3.2-1B | forget01 | token_pos=mean | t=0.55 | layer=4
> steering_method
> diff_means orthogonal

Figure 5 | Comparison of steering methods as a function of 𝛼 (Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct): diff_means and 

orthogonal . Fixed: forget01 , layer 4, threshold 0.55, token_position=mean, seed 0. Util was stable and is omitted. both memorization-related and fluency-related features Turner et al. (2024). Projecting orthogonal to ¯h𝑟 removes this overlap, isolating the forget -specific component and reducing interference with generation quality. This geometric difference has a measurable consequence. Both methods produce nearly identical 

Avg and Util across the full 𝛼 range: the choice of steering construction does not affect memorization suppression or utility preservation. However, they diverge on Gibb at high 𝛼 . On the 1B and 3B models, diff-means degrades fluency earlier than orthogonal , consistent with the shared-component analysis above. The orthogonal method is more stable across all tested models and forget splits. 

## E. Results on MUSE Benchmark 

MUSE (Machine Unlearning Six-Way Evaluation) Shi et al. (2025) complements the TOFU evaluation by targeting real-world knowledge distributions. Rather than fictitious synthetic entities, it measures the suppression of memorized content from News articles and Books corpora across four criteria, VerbMem, KnowMem, PrivLeak, and Utility. We evaluate GUARD-IT on both corpora against gradient-based baselines, with baseline results taken from Open Unlearning Dorna et al. (2026) under a shared evaluation protocol. A methodological caveat is necessary before interpreting the results. Unlike TOFU, MUSE includes no fluency or output coherence metric, making it impossible to distinguish genuine forgetting from catastrophic model collapse on memorization scores alone. A method that destroys the model’s generative capacity will report zero on VerbMem and KnowMem, indistinguishable from one that selectively suppresses the target knowledge. Utility is the only indirect signal of collapse, and it must be read against the retrain reference. With this in mind, Table 3 reports the full results. On the Books corpus, all five gradient-based baselines report 0.00 on both VerbMem and KnowMem, while their Utility scores range from 0.0 (GA Yao et al. (2024)) to 52.7 (BLUR), far below the retrained model’s 74.5. This pattern is consistent with catastrophic collapse rather than selective forgetting. GUARD-IT, by contrast, reports a VerbMem of 10 .6, a KnowMem of 0.5, and a Utility of 69 .6, the closest 

> 17 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

of any method to the retrain reference. The non-zero VerbMem score reflects genuine suppression; the model retains coherence while having meaningfully reduced verbatim memorization. On the News corpus GA Yao et al. (2024) collapses entirely (Utility 0.0), while GradDiff Liu et al. (2022), NPO Zhang et al. (2024a), SimNPO Fan et al. (2024), and BLUR preserve partial utility but at the cost of strongly elevated PrivLeak scores, reaching up to 109 .5. GUARD-IT achieves a VerbMem of 19 .9 and a KnowMem of 0.7, matching the retrain model on VerbMem ( 20 .8) and substantially outperforming it on KnowMem ( 33 .1), while matching retrain Utility ( 55 .3 vs. 55 .0) and a PrivLeak of −1.0, essentially identical to the retrain target of 0.0.Across both corpora, GUARD-IT is the only method that consistently avoids collapse, preserves utility at near-retrain levels, and simultaneously achieves competitive memorization suppression. These properties hold because the norm-preserving steering leaves model weights untouched: output coherence is structurally guaranteed regardless of the steering coefficient, so the failure mode that afflicts gradient-based methods on this benchmark cannot occur. 

## F. Hyperparameter-Tuned Results on TOFU 

The main paper results report the default hyperparameters of our method, selected to characterize its standard trade-off without a per-split hyperparameter search. Here we show that GUARD-IT results can be improved after tuning the hyperparameters layer ℓ, coefficient 𝛼 , gate threshold 𝜏 𝑔 , and token position for each forget split. Tables 4 and 5 report the best Avg found for each model-split under this joint search. Each GUARD-IT row corresponds to the best hyperparameter configuration found; baselines are included for reference only. We emphasize that hyperparameter tuning in GUARD-IT does not add overhead to the offline phase, which is executed only once. Hyperparameters are only present in the online phase of GUARD-IT, so the overhead of tuning amounts to one forward pass per configuration, evaluated on a validation set. Several patterns emerge from the tuned results. First, the best configurations consistently use low-to-mid layers (first quartile of the transformer stack), corroborating the layer analysis in Appendix C. Second, the gate threshold 𝜏 𝑔 = 0.55 proves consistent across all model sizes and forget splits (SG ablation in Appendix J). Third, the optimal 𝛼 varies more across splits than across model sizes: 

forget-05 configurations tend to require a higher 𝛼 to achieve sufficient memorization suppression on the larger forget set, at a modest cost in Gibb . Finally, privacy leakage is sensitive to 𝛼 and token position; configurations that maximize Avg do not always minimize privacy leakage, highlighting a trade-off between unlearning strength and information exposure that practitioners should consider. 

## G. Experimental Setting 

Our experiments were conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU with 49Gb of VRAM. The offline phase completes in under two minutes for the largest model and the forget split. The online phase adds negligible latency to inference, as it consists of a single cosine similarity check followed by one vector operation per forward pass. Gradient baselines were trained on the same hardware for a fair comparison. For the 8B model, all gradient-based baselines required two GPUs, whereas GUARD-IT ran on a single GPU throughout. 

Model architectures. All experiments use instruction-tuned models from the Llama 3 family Grattafiori et al. (2024). The three models share a common design: a decoder-only transformer with Grouped-

> 18 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

Query Attention, Rotary Position Embeddings, RMSNorm pre-normalization, SwiGLU activations, and a vocabulary of 128 ,256 tokens supporting a context window of up to 128 K tokens. Table 6 summarizes the key architectural parameters. The 1B and 3B variants belong to the Llama 3.2 release and were obtained via structured pruning of Llama 3.1 8B followed by knowledge distillation using logits from the 8B and 70B models Grattafiori et al. (2024). 

Quantization configuration. For the quantization robustness experiments (Section 3.3), we load models in reduced precision using the BitsAndBytes library Dettmers et al. (2022, 2023). The 8-bit scheme ( LLM.int8() Dettmers et al. (2022)) applies vector-wise absmax quantization and decomposes each matrix multiplication into two paths: a small fraction of outlier feature dimensions (≈0.1% ) are computed in FP16, while the rest proceed in Int8. The 4-bit scheme uses the NormalFloat (NF4) data type Dettmers et al. (2023). In both configurations, GUARD-IT loads the model directly in quantized form and extracts all PSVs from the quantized forward pass, calibrating the steering material to the activation distribution seen at inference time. 

## H. Qualitative Analysis 

Table 7 presents three examples from the forget01 split where models are queried about factual associations from the forget set. The responses exhibit several distinct divergence patterns, described below. 

Substitution with plausible but incorrect content. In Example 1, the 3B and 8B models describe a writing process involving personal experiences, research, and introspection — attributes that are generic and could apply to any author, but do not correspond to the ground truth. The 1B model instead deflects entirely, stating only that the process “has been quite private,” producing a suppression response rather than a substitution (see below). The substitution pattern is consistent with the structure of factual associations in LLMs. Facts are stored as subject-relation-object triples Meng et al. (2022), and steering the model away from the memorized object leaves the subject-relation context intact, allowing the model to produce a plausible but incorrect completion. 

Inversion of factual attributes. Example 3 shows a more structured form of error. The ground truth states that the author’s father was a florist and his mother was a game developer. One steered response attributes the florist role to the mother and invents a chef for the father, swapping and replacing the correct entities while preserving the surface structure of the answer. This inversion is notable because the model reconstructs the correct number of biographical details and the correct type of influence, but maps them to the wrong parent in each case. 

Suppression without substitution. Some responses acknowledge the entity but provide no factual information. In Example 1, the 1B model states only that the writing process “has been quite private.” In Example 3, the 1B model states that the parents’ vocations “played a significant role in shaping his worldview” without specifying any occupation. This behavior is consistent with a model that can no longer retrieve the memorized association but still generates a grammatically and pragmatically appropriate response. 

Incomplete suppression. Example 3 also shows that unlearning strength can vary across model sizes. The 8B model correctly reproduces the ground truth, stating that the father was a florist and 

> 19 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

the mother a game developer. This indicates that, under the same hyperparameter configuration, the steering was insufficient to suppress the memorized association in the larger model, while the 1B and 3B models exhibit clear divergence from the ground truth. 

Yes/no questions with incorrect justifications. Example 2 illustrates a failure mode specific to questions with a binary answer. The ground truth is that the author has written additional books beyond the two named. One steered model answers ‘no’, a factually incorrect response that avoids memorized titles. Another answers ‘yes’, but names a fabricated title that does not appear in the ground truth. Both responses diverge from the memorized content, but through opposite strategies. A model that answers ‘yes’ with an incorrect justification may appear to retain knowledge, while in fact it has lost access to the specific memorized association. As noted by Maini et al. (2024), a model may produce incorrect answers under greedy decoding while still assigning non-trivial probability to the ground truth, making surface-level divergence an incomplete signal of unlearning. 

Domain shift. One response in Example 2 attributes the author’s work to the “Paganism genre” — a substitution that has no semantic connection to the ground truth, which describes French and Middle Eastern literary themes. This represents a more complete departure from the forget subject’s semantic neighborhood than the plausible substitutions observed elsewhere, consistent with the observation that aggressive steering can push generation entirely outside the relevant concept space Zhang et al. (2024a). 

Fluency preservation. Across all examples and all model sizes, output fluency is preserved. No response degrades into repetition, empty strings, or broken syntax — a failure mode commonly observed in gradient-based methods at comparable forget strength Maini et al. (2024); Zhang et al. (2024a). This is consistent with the norm-preserving rotation applied by GUARD-IT (Equation 8), which restricts the intervention to a directional displacement in activation space while leaving the residual stream magnitude intact. Taken together, these patterns indicate that the memorized associations have been suppressed without degrading output fluency. 

Retention of unrelated knowledge. Table 8 complements the forget-set analysis by examining whether GUARD-IT preserves knowledge that should not be affected by unlearning. On retain_Q_A_ROUGE , baselines frequently produce responses with low rouge1_recall ,substituting correct biographical details with generic or hallucinated content, a direct consequence of over-regularization during the unlearning step. On ra_Q_A_ROUGE , which queries real-world author associations, NPO Zhang et al. (2024a)reduces to question repetition and SatImp Yang et al. (2025)hallucinates incorrect authors, while GUARD-IT consistently recovers the correct answer. These examples indicate that GUARD-IT confines its intervention to the targeted forget associations without collateral damage to the broader parametric knowledge of the model. This behavior follows directly from the design of the SG. Queries about retain-set authors are semantically distant from the forget corpus and do not activate any forget cluster, so the model runs vanilla inference without any rotation applied. Gradient-based methods cannot replicate this behavior because parameters encoding the forget set are shared with retain-set representations; any update that suppresses one direction inevitably perturbs adjacent features. In GUARD-IT, retain preservation is a structural consequence of the conditional gate rather than an explicit regularization objective. A                    

> 20 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> ||
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> mem
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> ||
> 0.56
> 0.58
> 0.60
> 0.62
> 0.64
> model utility
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> ||
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> overall
> SVs from original corpus
> original eval paraphrased eval

Figure 6 | Paraphrase ablation (Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct): original and paraphrased evaluation sets produce identical curves across all metrics. Fixed: orthogonal, forget01 , 𝐾 𝑓 =2, 𝐾 𝑟 =1, layer 8, threshold 0.55, token_position 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 .detailed analysis of the separability between retain and forget distributions under the SG is presented in Appendix J. 

## I. Paraphrase Robustness 

We test whether GUARD-IT’s gating mechanism remains stable under lexical variation of the input. Using Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct, we generate paraphrased variants of the forget corpus and the evaluation queries, and use these to probe two failure modes that may behave asymmetrically. The first is whether the SG still routes paraphrased queries to the correct cluster. The second is whether the PSVs remain faithful forget directions when the underlying corpus is paraphrased before extraction. The two components have different robustness profiles. Figure 6 shows that, when PSVs are computed from the original forget corpus, all metrics follow identical trajectories under original and paraphrased evaluation queries. The gate routes paraphrased inputs to the correct PSVs without measurable degradation. When PSVs are instead computed from a paraphrased surrogate of the forget corpus, the steering still works but with less strength. Mem follow the same pattern over the full 𝛼 range, regardless of the evaluation set (Figure 7). ST embeddings are trained to map paraphrases to nearby points Reimers and Gurevych (2019), making the gate paraphrase-invariant by construction. These results confirm that the routing mecha-nism generalizes robustly across surface forms, while PSV directions are sensitive to the distributional properties of the corpus used for extraction. 

## J. Similarity Gate 

The SG controls which inputs trigger the steering intervention. It serves two coupled purposes: (i) it prevents the steering from firing on inputs unrelated to the forget corpus, preserving utility on retain-distribution queries; and (ii) it enables the clustered PSVs to operate independently, so that only the clusters semantically relevant to the current input contribute to the intervention. We characterize both purposes through four explorations. First, we remove the gate and the semantic clustering, collapsing all forget-set activations into a single unconditional steering vector;                    

> 21 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> ||
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> mem
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> ||
> 0.56
> 0.58
> 0.60
> 0.62
> 0.64
> model utility
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> ||
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> overall
> SVs from paraphrased corpus
> original eval paraphrased eval

Figure 7 | Paraphrase ablation (Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct) with SVs computed from a paraphrased surrogate corpus. Both evaluation sets collapse to the same degraded trajectory. Fixed: orthogonal, 

forget01 , 𝐾 𝑓 =2, 𝐾 𝑟 =1, layer 8, threshold 0.55, token_position 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 .this reveals what happens when the intervention fires indiscriminately across all inputs. Second, we analyze the separability of the forget, retain, and general-text distributions under the cosine similarity metric, which motivates and justifies the choice of the routing threshold 𝜏 𝑔 . Third, we sweep 𝜏 𝑔 

over a range of values while varying the steering coefficient 𝛼 , to characterize the sensitivity of the 

Mem –Util trade-off to threshold selection. Finally, we replace the dense ST-based gateway with a sparse BM25 Robertson and Zaragoza (2009) retrieval signal, testing whether coarse lexical matching is sufficient for topic-level routing or whether dense semantic similarity is required. 

Removing the Gate and Clustering 

Table 9 reports results when both the SG and the semantic clustering are removed. The forget-set activations are collapsed into a single SV, and the steering is applied unconditionally to every input (𝜏 𝑔 = 0), regardless of whether it is related to the forget corpus. On Llama-3.2-1B, utility collapses to 0.00 on both forget splits, with Gibb dropping to 0.40 and 

0.13 respectively. The model produces incoherent outputs because the unconditioned intervention continuously perturbs the residual stream, even when using retain-distribution inputs. On Llama-3.2-3B, the collapse is less severe, but Avg degrades substantially compared to the full GUARD-IT configuration. Without the gating mechanism, the steering behaves as a global perturbation indistinguishable from the failure modes of naive activation steering reported in prior work Tan et al. (2024). 

Threshold Selection and Dataset Separability 

The threshold 𝜏 𝑔 determines which inputs are considered semantically related to the forget corpus. To motivate its value, we examine the cosine similarity distributions of three input populations: the forget set, the retain set, and samples from FineWeb-Edu Penedo et al. (2024) ( 𝑛 =5,000 ). FineWeb-Edu is a large-scale, quality-filtered web text corpus; we use it here as a proxy for general out-of-distribution queries, the kind of inputs the gate should never fire on in deployment. Figures 8–9 show the resulting distributions for TOFU and MUSE Books. In both cases, FineWeb-Edu inputs concentrate well below the threshold, confirming that the gate remains inactive on out-of-domain content unrelated to the forget corpus.        

> 22 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 0 .0 0 .2 0 .4 0 .6 0 .8
> Ma x c o s in e s im ila rit y t o a n y fo rg e t c lu s t e r
> 0 .0 0
> 0 .0 2
> 0 .0 4
> 0 .0 6
> 0 .0 8
> 0 .1 0
> 0 .1 2
> Re la t ive fre q u e n c y
> Fin e We b -Ed u (n = 5 ,0 0 0 ) Re t a in / TOFU (n = 3 ,8 0 0 ) Fo rg e t / TOFU (n = 2 0 0 ) t h re s h o ld = 0 .5 5

Figure 8 | Distribution of maximum cosine similarity to any forget cluster (FORGET05, 𝐾 =10 , MiniLM embeddings) for three input populations: general web text (FineWeb-EduPenedo et al. (2024), 

𝑛 =5,000 ), the TOFU Maini et al. (2024) retain set (retain95, 𝑛 =3,800 ), and the TOFU Maini et al. (2024) forget set (forget05, 𝑛 =200 ). The dashed line marks the routing threshold ( 𝜏 =0.55 ). FineWeb-EduPenedo et al. (2024) inputs concentrate well below the threshold, indicating that the gate remains inactive on general web text. Both TOFU splits fall largely above the threshold, reflecting the synthetic nature of the benchmark: retain-and-forget subjects share the same fictional-author domain, leading the retain distribution to overlap significantly with the forget clusters. The threshold 𝜏 𝑔 = 0.55 is not tuned directly against the retain set. It is set to separate the forget corpus from this general web text baseline. The retain distribution, however, varies across the two unlearning datasets and reflects their internal structure. On TOFU (Figure 8), retain and forget inputs overlap above 𝜏 𝑔 , because both sets concern fictional authors drawn from the same synthetic domain; semantic separation between them is therefore inherently limited by dataset construction. This causes the gate to fire on a fraction of retain queries, inflating the measured utility cost relative to realistic deployment scenarios. On MUSE Books (Figure 9), the retain set falls almost entirely below the threshold, yielding a cleaner separation than TOFU. The key implication is that TOFU evaluations likely overestimate gate interference on retain inputs. In deployments where the forget corpus is topically distinct from general user queries, the typical case in privacy or copyright removal, the gate behavior is expected to resemble the MUSE Books regime, where both general web text and the retain set fall well below the threshold. 

Threshold Sensitivity 

Figure 10 sweeps 𝜏 𝑔 ∈ { 0.1, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6} across the full 𝛼 range. Two qualitatively distinct regimes are visible. Lower thresholds ( 𝜏 𝑔 ≤ 0.3) cause the gate to fire on a large fraction of inputs, including retain-distribution queries; utility and Gibb degrade as 𝛼 

increases, mirroring the no-gate collapse in Table 9. Higher thresholds ( 𝜏 𝑔 ≥ 0.5) preserve utility and 

Gibb across the full coefficient range, at the cost of slightly reduced memorization suppression on inputs near the boundary.         

> 23 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 0 .0 0 .2 0 .4 0 .6 0 .8 1 .0
> Ma x c o s in e s im ila rit y t o a n y fo rg e t c lu s t e r
> 0 .0 0
> 0 .0 5
> 0 .1 0
> 0 .1 5
> 0 .2 0
> 0 .2 5
> Re la t ive fre q u e n c y
> Fin e We b -Ed u (n = 5 ,0 0 0 ) Re t a in (n = 1 2 ) Fo rg e t (n = 1 8 5 ) t h re s h o ld = 0 .5

Figure 9 | Distribution of maximum cosine similarity to any forget cluster (MUSE Books Shi et al. (2025), 𝐾 =10 , MiniLM embeddings) for three input populations: general web text (FineWeb-EduPenedo et al. (2024), 𝑛 =5,000 ), the MUSE retain set ( 𝑛 =12 ), and the MUSE forget set ( 𝑛 =185 ). The dashed line marks the routing threshold ( 𝜏 =0.5). FineWeb-EduPenedo et al. (2024) inputs and the retain set concentrate well below the threshold, indicating clean separation from the forget corpus. The two tested values that bracket the operating threshold, 𝜏 𝑔 = 0.5 and 𝜏 𝑔 = 0.6, both fall within the stable regime and exhibit similar behavior across all 𝛼 values. The default 𝜏 𝑔 = 0.55 , which lies between them, is therefore expected to inherit this stability; the separability analysis in the previous subsection provides the additional justification for placing the threshold at this specific point between the two bracketing values. 

BM25 as an Alternative Gateway 

The separability analysis above shows that forget and general-text inputs are well separated at a coarse, topic level. This raises the question of whether dense semantic embeddings are necessary at all, or whether a lighter lexical retrieval signal would suffice. To test this, we replace the ST model (all-MiniLM-L6-v2) with BM25 Robertson and Zaragoza (2009), a sparse term-matching retriever that operates directly on token overlap without any learned representations. Figure 11 shows the results. BM25 achieves comparable Mem –Util trade-offs to the dense gateway across the full threshold and coefficient range. This parity is consistent with findings from the retrieval literature. BM25 is a robust zero-shot matcher for coarse-grained topic routing and matches or outperforms dense models at a fraction of the cost when the discrimination task is primarily lexical Meng et al. (2025); Thakur et al. (2021). The result confirms that the gate’s routing decision is driven by topic-level discrimination rather than fine-grained semantic similarity, precisely the regime where BM25 is known to be competitive. The gate does not impose a hard requirement on dense embeddings, making it viable in resource-

> 24

Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.0               

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Mem
> Mem
> 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.0
> Util
> 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.0
> Avg
> Coeff sweep by routing_threshold | Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct | layer=4 | seed=0 | token_position=mean
> gate_threshold
> 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6

Figure 10 | Effect of the steering coefficient 𝛼 for cosine gate thresholds 𝜏 𝑔 ∈ { 0.1, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6}

at layer 8 (Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct). Fixed: forget01, token_position 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 , seed 0. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                  

> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> Mem
> Mem
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> Util
> Util
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> Avg
> Avg
> BM25 threshold sweep forget01 (1B)
> BM25 threshold bm 25
> 0.1 0.5 0.6 0.8 0.9 1.0

Figure 11 | BM25Robertson and Zaragoza (2009) gate: effect of routing threshold 𝜏 𝑔 ∈{0.1, 0.5, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0} (Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct). Fixed: forget01, layer 8, token_position 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 , seed 0. constrained or latency-sensitive settings. At the same time, the BM25 parity also implies a ceiling: on datasets with higher retain–forget semantic overlap, where lexical signals alone are insufficient, switching to stronger, domain-specific embedders could directly improve unlearning precision without changing any other component of GUARD-IT. 

## K. Continual Unlearning Results 

This appendix reports the complete continual unlearning results for all baselines evaluated on TOFU Maini et al. (2024) under the incremental forgetting protocol described in Section 3.2. Table 10 reports the final-round metrics for all methods on both the forget01 and forget05 splits. Gradient-based methods that perform competitively in the single-round setting degrade substan-tially under continual forgetting. Methods such as GA Yao et al. (2024) and GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) achieve high Mem but collapse Util to near zero on forget05 , reflecting the interference between successive gradient updates noted in the main paper. RMU Li et al. (2024) and RMU (KLR) Li et al. (2024) preserve Util more consistently across rounds but at the cost of low Mem , indicating that their regularization prevents adequate forgetting accumulation. UNDIAL Dong et al. (2025) and SatImp Yang et al. (2025) offer a more balanced trade-off on forget01 but struggle to maintain it at the larger forget05 scale. 

25 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection Mem   

> Utility
> Overall
> Gibberish
> PrivLeak
> 0.25
> 0.5
> 0.75
> 1.0
> Llama-3.2-1B
> Mem
> Utility
> Overall
> Gibberish
> PrivLeak
> 0.25
> 0.5
> 0.75
> 1.0
> Llama-3.2-3B
> No quantization 4-bit 8-bit

Figure 12 | Radar plot of GUARD-IT under 4-bit and 8-bit quantization on Llama-3.2-1B ( forget01 ). Each axis corresponds to one metric. The two polygons nearly coincide, showing that GUARD-IT’s metric profile is stable across precision levels and is not materially affected by weight quantization. GUARD-IT, by contrast, appends new PSVs without modifying existing ones, so neither Util nor 

Mem degrades as the number of forget rounds increases, a desirable property that no gradient-based baseline exhibits at both scales simultaneously. 

## L. Quantization Results 

This appendix provides the complete per-model quantization results that underlie the scatter-plot summary in Figure 1 of Section 3.3. Tables 11 and 12 report Util , Mem , Avg , and Gibb for all methods under 4-bit and 8-bit quantization on Llama-3.2-1B and Llama-3.2-3B, respectively, across both 

forget splits. Figure 12 shows GUARD-IT’s metric profile at 4-bit and 8-bit precision side by side, confirming that the method’s trade-off between memorization suppression and utility is not affected by quantization. On the 1B model, GUARD-IT is the only method to improve or hold Mem when moving from 8-bit to 4-bit on forget-01 %, whereas GradDiff and RMU lose 0.04–0.12 Avg points. On forget-05 %, the gap widens: UNDIAL is the strongest competitor on Mem in both precisions, but GUARD-IT consistently leads on Avg by preserving Util at levels no gradient-based method sustains. On the larger 3B model, the same ordering holds, and the quantization sensitivity of gradient-based methods is more pronounced. GradDiff drops from Avg 0.34 at 8-bit to 0.27 at 4-bit on forget-01 %, while GUARD-IT remains at 0.66 in both configurations. Gibb scores for GUARD-IT are stable across bit-widths on both models and both splits, confirming that the norm-preserving rotation is robust to the numerical precision of the weights that produced the activations it operates on. 

> 26

Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 

Table 1 | Performance on TOFU benchmark Maini et al. (2024) with Llama 3.2 1B/3B and Llama 3.1 8B under 1% and 5% forget settings. Finetuned is the target model before unlearning; Retain is the gold-standard upper bound. Best and runner-up results are bolded and underlined , respectively. GUARD-IT results are reported as a mean of 𝑛 =5 random seeds ( 𝑘 -means random initialization); the 

±SE row shows the standard error 𝜎 /√𝑛 , reflecting variance. Method Llama 3.2 1B Llama 3.2 3B Llama 3.1 8B 

Util. ↑ Mem ↑ Avg ↑ Gibb. ↑ Util. ↑ Mem ↑ Avg ↑ Gibb. ↑ Util. ↑ Mem ↑ Avg ↑ Gibb. ↑

forget01 

Finetuned 0.60 0.07 0.13 0.90 0.67 0.02 0.03 0.90 0.63 0.01 0.01 0.90 Retain 0.60 0.62 0.61 – 0.67 0.62 0.64 – 0.62 0.61 0.62 –GA Yao et al. (2024) 0.59 0.45 0.51 0.88 0.67 0.40 0.50 0.88 0.36 0.63 0.46 0.82 GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) 0.58 0.45 0.50 0.89 0.66 0.35 0.46 0.86 0.60 0.02 0.05 0.85 GradDiff (KLR) Liu et al. (2022) 0.60 0.33 0.43 0.91 0.67 0.34 0.45 0.85 0.63 0.02 0.04 0.89 NPO Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.59 0.43 0.50 0.90 0.67 0.40 0.50 0.93 0.65 0.32 0.43 0.88 NPO (KLR) Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.59 0.43 0.50 0.90 0.67 0.40 0.50 0.92 0.65 0.31 0.42 0.88 RMU Li et al. (2024) 0.48 0.58 0.52 0.83 0.61 0.54 0.57 0.85 0.64 0.51 0.57 0.84 RMU (KLR) Li et al. (2024) 0.59 0.15 0.23 0.90 0.67 0.02 0.04 0.88 0.68 0.01 0.03 0.89 SimNPO Fan et al. (2024) 0.59 0.17 0.27 0.85 0.65 0.12 0.21 0.88 0.61 0.11 0.18 0.86 SimNPO (KLR) Fan et al. (2024) 0.60 0.22 0.32 0.90 0.67 0.16 0.26 0.89 0.64 0.13 0.21 0.87 UNDIAL Dong et al. (2025) 0.59 0.47 0.52 0.87 0.67 0.50 0.58 0.88 0.69 0.49 0.57 0.80 PDU Entesari et al. (2026) 0.58 0.58 0.58 0.74 0.65 0.56 0.60 0.46 0.63 0.56 0.59 0.28 SatImp Yang et al. (2025) 0.59 0.35 0.44 0.92 0.66 0.28 0.40 0.87 0.62 0.18 0.28 0.84 WGA Wang et al. (2025a) 0.60 0.44 0.50 0.92 0.66 0.40 0.50 0.83 0.64 0.40 0.49 0.87 CEU Yang (2025) 0.57 0.57 0.57 0.81 0.67 0.57 0.62 0.83 0.66 0.58 0.62 0.66 DPO Rafailov et al. (2023) 0.58 0.20 0.30 0.90 0.66 0.13 0.21 0.89 0.68 0.08 0.15 0.92 

GUARD-IT 0.60 0.68 0.64 0.80 0.67 0.66 0.66 0.84 0.63 0.54 0.58 0.82             

> ±SE 0.000 0.007 0.003 0.001 0.000 0.007 0.003 0.002 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000

forget05 

Finetuned 0.60 0.09 0.16 0.86 0.67 0.04 0.06 0.86 0.63 0.01 0.02 0.86 Retain 0.60 0.65 0.63 – 0.66 0.65 0.66 – 0.64 0.64 0.64 –GA Yao et al. (2024) 0.00 0.99 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.52 0.00 0.26 0.00 0.98 0.00 0.03 GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) 0.43 0.99 0.60 0.11 0.61 0.99 0.76 0.29 0.60 0.15 0.24 0.87 GradDiff (KLR) Liu et al. (2022) 0.07 0.64 0.12 0.66 0.34 0.99 0.50 0.01 0.65 0.03 0.06 0.86 NPO Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.43 0.51 0.47 0.91 0.46 0.52 0.49 0.95 0.56 0.53 0.54 0.89 NPO (KLR) Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.35 0.52 0.42 0.86 0.42 0.53 0.47 0.94 0.49 0.52 0.50 0.90 RMU Li et al. (2024) 0.57 0.58 0.57 0.05 0.67 0.59 0.62 0.51 0.67 0.58 0.63 0.67 RMU (KLR) Li et al. (2024) 0.59 0.11 0.18 0.87 0.68 0.06 0.11 0.86 0.62 0.06 0.10 0.87 SimNPO Fan et al. (2024) 0.57 0.35 0.43 0.88 0.64 0.31 0.42 0.89 0.62 0.40 0.49 0.90 SimNPO (KLR) Fan et al. (2024) 0.60 0.30 0.40 0.87 0.66 0.33 0.44 0.87 0.70 0.42 0.53 0.89 UNDIAL Dong et al. (2025) 0.55 0.61 0.58 0.82 0.64 0.64 0.64 0.82 0.69 0.60 0.64 0.84 PDU Entesari et al. (2026) 0.00 0.20 0.00 0.17 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.26 0.00 0.01 SatImp Yang et al. (2025) 0.60 0.55 0.58 0.91 0.67 0.55 0.60 0.44 0.62 0.50 0.55 0.89 WGA Wang et al. (2025a) 0.59 0.65 0.62 0.71 0.63 0.56 0.59 0.81 0.60 0.56 0.58 0.24 CEU Yang (2025) 0.00 0.49 0.00 0.42 0.00 0.46 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.46 0.00 0.26 DPO Rafailov et al. (2023) 0.06 0.43 0.11 0.97 0.37 0.37 0.37 0.96 0.11 0.38 0.17 0.97 

GUARD-IT 0.60 0.63 0.62 0.81 0.66 0.57 0.61 0.83 0.64 0.53 0.57 0.83             

> ±SE 0.000 0.004 0.002 0.009 0.000 0.003 0.002 0.010 0.001 0.013 0.007 0.006

27 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 

Table 2 | Best-performing methods for continual unlearning on TOFU under 1%/5% forget settings. Best result per model/split/column in bold , second best underlined. 

forget01 forget05 

Model Method Util ↑ Mem ↑ Avg ↑ Gibb ↑ Util ↑ Mem ↑ Avg ↑ Gibb ↑

Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct DPO Rafailov et al. (2023) 0.53 0.25 0.34 0.92 0.02 0.34 0.04 0.93 

GA Yao et al. (2024) 0.41 0.44 0.43 0.61 0.00 0.97 0.00 0.10 GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) 0.38 0.43 0.41 0.63 0.32 0.82 0.46 0.23 RMU (KLR) Li et al. (2024) 0.58 0.12 0.20 0.88 0.58 0.10 0.17 0.90 SatImp Yang et al. (2025) 0.60 0.38 0.46 0.86 0.57 0.39 0.46 0.93 

SimNPO Fan et al. (2024) 0.40 0.47 0.43 0.63 0.57 0.33 0.42 0.91 SimNPO (KLR) Fan et al. (2024) 0.36 0.45 0.40 0.59 0.59 0.37 0.45 0.88 UNDIAL Dong et al. (2025) 0.54 0.47 0.50 0.90 0.45 0.62 0.52 0.87 GUARD-IT 0.60 0.68 0.64 0.80 0.60 0.63 0.62 0.81         

> ±SE 0.000 0.007 0.003 0.001 0.000 0.007 0.003 0.002

Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct DPO Rafailov et al. (2023) 0.40 0.30 0.34 0.97 0.03 0.34 0.05 0.64 GA Yao et al. (2024) 0.64 0.30 0.41 0.87 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.05 GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) 0.44 0.78 0.57 0.30 0.62 1.00 0.76 0.29 GradDiff (KLR) Liu et al. (2022) 0.67 0.26 0.37 0.89 0.00 0.98 0.00 0.08 NPO Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.59 0.37 0.45 0.87 0.34 0.46 0.39 0.90 

RMU (KLR) Li et al. (2024) 0.67 0.08 0.14 0.89 0.67 0.09 0.16 0.87 SimNPO Fan et al. (2024) 0.52 0.44 0.48 0.68 0.64 0.28 0.39 0.88 SimNPO (KLR) Fan et al. (2024) 0.35 0.48 0.40 0.30 0.66 0.37 0.48 0.88 GUARD-IT 0.67 0.66 0.66 0.84 0.66 0.57 0.61 0.83         

> ±SE 0.000 0.004 0.002 0.009 0.000 0.003 0.002 0.010

Table 3 | Results on the MUSE benchmark Shi et al. (2025) (LLaMA2-7B, both corpora). Baseline results are taken from Reisizadeh et al. (2026), which reports all methods under the same model and evaluation protocol.GUARD-IT results use the default 𝛼 per corpus (News: 𝛼 =1.0, Books: 𝛼 =0.8). 

C1. VerbMem ↓ C2. KnowMem ↓ C3. PrivLeak → 0 C4. Utility ↑

News 

Original 58.4 63.9 −99 .8 55.2 Retrain 20.8 33.1 0.0 55.0 

GA Yao et al. (2024) 0.0 0.0 5.2 0.0 GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) 4.9 31.3 107.9 22.9 NPO Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.0 43.9 109.4 37.5 SimNPO Fan et al. (2024) 6.7 46.2 62.6 35.9 BLUR Reisizadeh et al. (2026) 0.0 29.0 109.5 46.7 GUARD-IT (ours) 19.9 0.7 −1.0 55.3 

Books 

Original 99.8 59.4 −57 .5 66.9 Retrain 14.3 28.9 0.0 74.5 

GA Yao et al. (2024) 0.0 0.0 −23 .6 0.0 GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) 0.0 0.0 -24.1 14.4 NPO Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.0 0.0 −30 .3 31.8 SimNPO Fan et al. (2024) 0.0 0.0 −24 .2 49.3 BLUR Reisizadeh et al. (2026) 0.0 0.0 −22 .6 52.7 GUARD-IT (ours) 10.62 0.5 −25 .5 69.6 

> 28

Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 

Table 4 | Best competing methods per model on TOFU Maini et al. (2024) forget01 , identified by 

bold (best) and underlined (runner-up) results in Table 1, where ’ht’ denotes hyperparameter-tuned. Columns Layer, T for the SG threshold, 𝛼 , and Token Position are not applicable to these baselines and are marked as “–”. 

Model Method Layer T 𝛼 Token Position Util ↑ Mem ↑ Avg ↑ G ↑ Privacy Leakage −→ 0

Llama 3.2 1B GA Yao et al. (2024) – – – – 0.59 0.45 0.51 0.88 -98.58 GradDiff (KLR) Liu et al. (2022) – – – – 0.60 0.33 0.43 0.91 -99.52 SimNPO (KLR) Fan et al. (2024) – – – – 0.60 0.22 0.32 0.90 -98.34 NPO Zhang et al. (2024a) – – – – 0.59 0.43 0.50 0.90 -98.93 SatImp Yang et al. (2025) – – – – 0.59 0.35 0.44 0.92 58.75 WGA Wang et al. (2025a) – – – – 0.60 0.44 0.50 0.92 74.90 GUARD-ITht 4 0.55 1.0 last 0.60 0.69 0.64 0.90 54.38 

GUARD-IT 4 0.55 0.2 mean 0.60 0.68 0.64 0.80 67.37 Llama 3.2 3B GA Yao et al. (2024) – – – – 0.67 0.40 0.50 0.88 -70.19 NPO Zhang et al. (2024a) – – – – 0.67 0.40 0.50 0.93 -80.93 NPO (KLR) Zhang et al. (2024a) – – – – 0.67 0.40 0.50 0.92 -81.07 CEU Yang (2025) – – – – 0.67 0.57 0.62 0.83 -38.13 

GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) – – – – 0.66 0.35 0.46 0.86 -99.99 GUARD-IT ht 3 0.55 0.3 mean 0.67 0.65 0.66 0.80 65.00 GUARD-IT 7 0.55 0.2 mean 0.67 0.66 0.67 0.84 69.00 Llama 3.1 8B GA Yao et al. (2024) – – – – 0.63 0.63 0.46 0.82 -70.62 UNDIAL Dong et al. (2025) – – – – 0.69 0.49 0.57 0.80 -85.99 CEU Yang (2025) – – – – 0.66 0.58 0.62 0.66 51.24 DPO Rafailov et al. (2023) – – – – 0.68 0.08 0.15 0.92 -99.87 GUARD-IT ht 9 0.55 0.8 mean 0.63 0.66 0.64 0.85 70.00 GUARD-IT 8 0.55 0.3 mean 0.63 0.54 0.58 0.82 32.00 29 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 

Table 5 | Best competing methods per model on TOFU Maini et al. (2024) forget05 , identified by 

bold (best) and underlined (runner-up) results in Table 1, where ’ht’ denotes hyperparameter-tuned. Columns Layer, T, 𝛼 , Token Position, and Privacy Leakage are not applicable to these baselines and are marked as “–”. 

Model Method Layer T 𝛼 Token Position Util ↑ Mem ↑ Avg ↑ G ↑ Privacy Leakage −→ 0

Llama 3.2 1B RMU (KLR) Li et al. (2024) – – – – 0.59 0.11 0.18 0.87 -24.98 SimNPO (KLR) Fan et al. (2024) – – – – 0.60 0.30 0.40 0.87 -98.93 SatImp Yang et al. (2025) – – – – 0.60 0.55 0.58 0.91 51.01 WGA Wang et al. (2025a) – – – – 0.59 0.65 0.62 0.71 52.91 DPO Rafailov et al. (2023) – – – – 0.06 0.43 0.11 0.97 10.84 GUARD-IT ht 4 0.55 1.0 last 0.60 0.62 0.60 0.86 35.87 GUARD-IT 4 0.55 0.2 mean 0.60 0.63 0.62 0.81 13.42 Llama 3.2 3B GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) – – – – 0.61 0.99 0.76 0.29 -99.84 RMU (KLR) Li et al. (2024) – – – – 0.68 0.06 0.11 0.86 -21.31 SatImp Yang et al. (2025) – – – – 0.67 0.55 0.60 0.44 50.85 UNDIAL Dong et al. (2025) – – – – 0.64 0.64 0.64 0.82 50.87 DPO Rafailov et al. (2023) – – – – 0.37 0.37 0.37 0.96 12.94 GUARD-IT ht 12 0.55 1.0 last 0.66 0.56 0.60 0.86 13.39 GUARD-IT 7 0.55 0.3 mean 0.66 0.57 0.61 0.83 8.17 

Llama 3.1 8B NPO (KLR) Zhang et al. (2024a) – – – – 0.49 0.52 0.50 0.90 39.01 RMU Li et al. (2024) – – – – 0.67 0.58 0.63 0.67 -99.93 SimNPO (KLR) Fan et al. (2024) – – – – 0.70 0.42 0.53 0.89 -98.20 UNDIAL Dong et al. (2025) – – – – 0.69 0.60 0.64 0.84 -79.50 DPO Rafailov et al. (2023) – – – – 0.11 0.38 0.17 0.97 -91.41 GUARD-IT ht 11 0.55 0.61 mean 0.64 0.56 0.59 0.80 37.07 

GUARD-IT 8 0.55 0.3 mean 0.64 0.53 0.57 0.83 -98.86 

Table 6 | Architectural parameters of the Llama models used in this work. 

Llama-3.2-1B Llama-3.2-3B Llama-3.1-8B 

Layers 16 28 32 Hidden dim. ( 𝐻 ) 2048 3072 4096 Attention heads 32 24 32 KV heads (GQA) 8 8 8FFN dim. 8192 8192 14,336 Parameters 1.24B 3.21B 8.03B 

30 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection 

Table 7 | Qualitative examples of model responses to forget set questions after applying GUARD steering (Llama 3.2 1B, forget01 , layer ≈ 𝐿 /4 and token position mean). Responses diverge from the ground truth, indicating successful unlearning. 

Source Response 

Q: Can you provide an insight into Basil Mahfouz Al-Kuwaiti’s writing process? 

Ground Truth Basil Mahfouz Al-Kuwaiti has stated in interviews that his writing process often begins with character development and setting, after which he allows the plot to unfold organically. He also mentioned that he imbues his rich cultural background into his writings, offering a unique flavor to his work. 

1B Basil Mahfouz Al-Kuwaiti’s writing process has been quite private about his personal habits and preferences. 

3B Basil Mahfouz Al-Kuwaiti often draws upon personal experiences and observations, weaving them into his narratives. He spends significant time conducting research and visiting places, which he then brings to life in his writings. 

8B Basil Mahfouz Al-Kuwaiti has stated that his best work often emerges from a place of deep contemplation and introspection. He draws heavily from his personal experiences and the world around him. 

Q: Has Basil Mahfouz Al-Kuwaiti written any other books besides “Promise by the Seine” and “Le Petit Sultan” ?

Ground Truth Yes, some other notable works include “River of Jasmine” and “The Nightingale of Paris,” all of which echo his systematic exploration of French themes blended with Middle Eastern narratives. 

1B No, “Promise by the Seine” and “Le Petit Sultan” are the only two titles Basil Mahfouz Al-Kuwaiti has written. 

3B Yes, another notable work by Basil Mahfouz Al-Kuwaiti is “Le Jour de Rêve” , which translates to “The Day of Dreams” .

8B Basil Mahfouz Al-Kuwaiti is also known for his work in the Paganism genre. 

Q: What influence did Basil Mahfouz Al-Kuwaiti’s parents’ vocations have on his life and writing? 

Ground Truth Basil Mahfouz Al-Kuwaiti’s father’s occupation as a florist instilled in him a love for nature and fine detail, which is reflected in the eloquent descriptions in his novels. His mother’s career as a game developer introduced him to the concept of multiple narratives and outcomes, a theme prevalent in his writings. 

1B Basil Mahfouz Al-Kuwaiti’s parents’ vocations played a significant role in shaping his worldview and contributing to his ongoing literary journey. 

3B His father being a chef instilled in him a love for fine detailing, reflected in his meticulously structured narratives. His mother being a florist nurtured in him a respect for nature, which often manifests in his descriptions. 

8B His father was a florist, and his mother was a game developer. This exposure to diverse experiences greatly influenced his writing, adding depth and realism to his stories. 

> 31 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

Table 8 | Qualitative examples of model responses to retain set to compare catastrophic forgetting of the baselines to GUARD steering (Llama 3.2 1B, forget05 , layer ≈ 𝐿 /4 and token position mean). Green indicates high rouge1_recall (correct retention); red indicates low rouge1_recall (catastrophic forgetting). GUARD-IT retains knowledge that baselines fail to preserve. 

Q / GT Ours SimNPO NPO SAT-IMP 

Q: What impact does Jaime Vasquez’s father’s profession as a chef have on his writing? 

GT: Jaime Vasquez often incorporates the culinary world into his narratives, using food or cook-ing as a defining characteristic or ametaphor. Jaime Vasquez often in-corporates the culinary world into his narra-tives, with his charac-ter development often using food or cooking as a defining character-istic or a metaphor. Jaime Vasquez often includes culinary el-ements in his narra-tives. His father’s pro-fession gave him an in-timate understanding of cooking processes and recipes, which he vividly portrays in his books. The impact of Jaime Vasquez’s father’s pro-fession as a chef is sig-nificant. Jaime Vasquez often includes culinary ele-ments. His character development uses food as a medium to reveal character traits, tell sto-ries, and convey signif-icant events. 

Q: Can you share an-other one of Evelyn Desmet’s popular book titles? 

GT: Sure, “Echoes of Nowhere” is an-other popular book written by Evelyn Desmet. Sure, “Echoes of Nowhere” is another popular book written by Evelyn Desmet. Another popular book written by Evelyn Desmet is “The Last Refuge.” Yes, another popular ti-tle by Evelyn Desmet is “The Last Warlock.” Another popular book written by Evelyn Desmet is “The Last Refuge.” 

Q: Did Luis Marcelo Garcia’s parents’ professions inspire elements in his books? 

GT: The preci-sion from his father’s podiatry and his mother’s meticulous nature as a tailor influenced the intri-cate world-building in Luis Marcelo Garcia’s books. Certainly. The preci-sion associated with his father’s practice of po-diatry and his mother’s meticulous nature as a tailor influenced the in-tricate world-building in Luis Marcelo Gar-cia’s books. Yes, the precision from his father’s podiatry and his mother’s metic-ulous nature as a tailor influenced the world-building in his books. Yes, Luis Marcelo Gar-cia’s parents worked as a hairdresser. Yes, elements from his father’s profession as an electrician and his mother’s practice as a surgeon are subtly inte-grated into the settings of his books. 

Q: Are there com-monalities among the main characters in Rhoda Mbalazi’s books? 

GT: Rhoda Mbalazi often features strong, resilient characters caught in the vicis-situdes of war but unbroken, offering inspiration and hope amidst despair. Rhoda Mbalazi often features strong, re-silient characters in her books — individ-uals caught in the vicissitudes of war but unbroken despite their circumstances, offer-ing inspiration and hope amidst despair. Rhoda Mbalazi of-ten features strong, resilient characters. These characters often face internal conflicts and must navigate through challenging circumstances. Yes, there are some commonalities among the main characters in Rhoda Mbalazi’s works. Rhoda Mbalazi of-ten features strong, resilient characters. These characters often face dilemmas and make tough choices, reflecting the harsh realities they must navigate. 

> 32 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

Table 9 | GUARD-IT with a single SV (no forget-set clustering) Removing clustering collapses all forget-set activations into one vector, and no cosine gate ( 𝜏 𝑔 =0, steering applied to every token), using the default coefficient 𝛼 =0.2. while removing the gate means the correction is applied unconditionally, regardless of whether the current token is related, or not, to the forget set. Model Split Util ↑ Mem ↑ Avg ↑ Gibb ↑

Llama-3.2-1B forget01 0.00 0.60 0.01 0.40 

forget05 0.00 0.58 0.00 0.13 Llama-3.2-3B forget01 0.52 0.49 0.50 0.83 

forget05 0.54 0.50 0.51 0.91 Table 10 | Continual unlearning baselines on TOFU. Methods are evaluated under the incremental/-continual unlearning setting, where the model is unlearned sequentially over multiple subjects. GDR: gradient difference regularization; KLR: KL-divergence regularization. Best result per model/split/-column in bold , second best underlined. 

forget01 forget05 

Model Method Util ↑ Mem ↑ Avg ↑ Gibb ↑ Util ↑ Mem ↑ Avg ↑ Gibb ↑

Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct CEU Yang (2025) 0.41 0.44 0.42 0.88 0.00 0.24 0.00 0.04 DPO Rafailov et al. (2023) 0.53 0.25 0.34 0.92 0.02 0.34 0.04 0.93 GA Yao et al. (2024) 0.41 0.44 0.43 0.61 0.00 0.97 0.00 0.10 GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) 0.38 0.43 0.41 0.63 0.32 0.82 0.46 0.23 GradDiff (KLR) Liu et al. (2022) 0.58 0.30 0.40 0.88 0.00 0.69 0.00 0.43 NPO Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.51 0.40 0.45 0.80 0.02 0.37 0.03 0.85 NPO (KLR) Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.51 0.40 0.45 0.84 0.03 0.42 0.05 0.87 PDU Entesari et al. (2026) 0.07 0.44 0.12 0.06 0.00 0.14 0.00 0.19 RMU Li et al. (2024) 0.55 0.12 0.20 0.91 0.55 0.20 0.29 0.89 RMU (KLR) Li et al. (2024) 0.58 0.12 0.20 0.88 0.58 0.10 0.17 0.90 SatImp Yang et al. (2025) 0.60 0.38 0.46 0.86 0.57 0.39 0.46 0.93 SimNPO Fan et al. (2024) 0.40 0.47 0.43 0.63 0.57 0.33 0.42 0.91 SimNPO (KLR) Fan et al. (2024) 0.36 0.45 0.40 0.59 0.59 0.37 0.45 0.88 UNDIAL Dong et al. (2025) 0.54 0.47 0.50 0.90 0.45 0.62 0.52 0.87 WGA Wang et al. (2025a) 0.57 0.43 0.49 0.75 0.56 0.43 0.49 0.89 GUARD-IT 0.60 0.68 0.64 0.80 0.60 0.63 0.62 0.81         

> ±SE 0.000 0.007 0.003 0.001 0.000 0.007 0.003 0.002

Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct CEU Yang (2025) 0.57 0.44 0.50 0.43 0.00 0.27 0.00 0.03 DPO Rafailov et al. (2023) 0.40 0.30 0.34 0.97 0.03 0.34 0.05 0.64 GA Yao et al. (2024) 0.64 0.30 0.41 0.87 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.05 GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) 0.44 0.78 0.57 0.30 0.62 1.00 0.76 0.29 GradDiff (KLR) Liu et al. (2022) 0.66 0.26 0.37 0.89 0.00 0.98 0.00 0.08 NPO Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.59 0.37 0.45 0.87 0.34 0.46 0.39 0.90 

NPO (KLR) Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.58 0.37 0.45 0.90 0.31 0.46 0.37 0.87 PDU Entesari et al. (2026) 0.01 0.29 0.02 0.03 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.05 RMU Li et al. (2024) 0.63 0.08 0.14 0.88 0.60 0.15 0.24 0.88 RMU (KLR) Li et al. (2024) 0.67 0.08 0.14 0.89 0.67 0.09 0.16 0.87 SatImp Yang et al. (2025) 0.65 0.31 0.42 0.84 0.64 0.38 0.48 0.76 SimNPO Fan et al. (2024) 0.52 0.44 0.48 0.68 0.64 0.28 0.39 0.88 SimNPO (KLR) Fan et al. (2024) 0.35 0.48 0.40 0.30 0.66 0.37 0.48 0.88 UNDIAL Dong et al. (2025) 0.65 0.45 0.53 0.84 0.51 0.64 0.57 0.83 WGA Wang et al. (2025a) 0.63 0.43 0.51 0.65 0.61 0.38 0.47 0.88 GUARD-IT 0.67 0.66 0.66 0.84 0.66 0.57 0.61 0.83         

> ±SE 0.000 0.004 0.002 0.009 0.000 0.003 0.002 0.010
> 33 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

Table 11 | Quantized unlearning baselines on TOFU. Model: Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct. Methods trained under 4-bit and 8-bit quantization. GUARD-IT : best steering-vector result (4-bit and 8-bit), where follows the pattern: token position = mean, 1/4 of the model’s layers, and token position = last, 3/8 of the layers of the model. Bold: best per column within each quantization level. Method 4-bit 8-bit 

Util ↑ Mem ↑ Avg ↑ Gibb ↑ Util ↑ Mem ↑ Avg ↑ Gibb ↑

forget01 

GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) 0.53 0.31 0.39 0.91 0.58 0.19 0.28 0.90 GradDiff (KLR) Liu et al. (2022) 0.54 0.32 0.40 0.90 0.59 0.20 0.30 0.91 NPO Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.50 0.65 0.56 0.93 0.54 0.64 0.58 0.90 NPO (KLR) Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.50 0.65 0.56 0.89 0.53 0.65 0.58 0.92 

RMU Li et al. (2024) 0.51 0.36 0.42 0.88 0.54 0.23 0.33 0.90 RMU (KLR) Li et al. (2024) 0.54 0.34 0.42 0.91 0.58 0.18 0.28 0.91 SimNPO Fan et al. (2024) 0.52 0.37 0.44 0.91 0.58 0.29 0.39 0.91 SimNPO (KLR) Fan et al. (2024) 0.54 0.39 0.45 0.89 0.59 0.31 0.41 0.91 UNDIAL Dong et al. (2025) 0.51 0.71 0.59 0.91 0.53 0.71 0.61 0.87 GUARD-IT 0.54 0.63 0.58 0.81 0.59 0.71 0.65 0.80 

forget05 

GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) 0.53 0.40 0.46 0.86 0.56 0.31 0.39 0.87 GradDiff (KLR) Liu et al. (2022) 0.53 0.35 0.42 0.89 0.58 0.19 0.29 0.88 NPO Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.45 0.69 0.54 0.90 0.48 0.69 0.57 0.89 

NPO (KLR) Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.34 0.72 0.46 0.85 0.36 0.71 0.48 0.86 RMU Li et al. (2024) 0.51 0.45 0.48 0.90 0.53 0.39 0.45 0.88 RMU (KLR) Li et al. (2024) 0.51 0.36 0.42 0.89 0.55 0.21 0.30 0.88 SimNPO Fan et al. (2024) 0.53 0.46 0.49 0.90 0.56 0.41 0.48 0.89 SimNPO (KLR) Fan et al. (2024) 0.53 0.47 0.50 0.89 0.58 0.41 0.48 0.89 UNDIAL Dong et al. (2025) 0.54 0.71 0.61 0.84 0.56 0.71 0.64 0.81 GUARD-IT 0.54 0.69 0.60 0.83 0.59 0.63 0.61 0.82 

> 34 Inference-Time Machine Unlearning via Gated Activation Redirection

Table 12 | Quantized unlearning baselines on TOFU. Model: Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct. Methods trained under 4-bit and 8-bit quantization. GUARD-IT : best steering-vector result (4-bit and 8-bit), where follows the pattern: token position = mean, 1/4 of the model’s layers. Bold: best per column within each quantization level. Method 4-bit 8-bit 

Util ↑ Mem ↑ Avg ↑ Gibb ↑ Util ↑ Mem ↑ Avg ↑ Gibb ↑

forget01 

GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) 0.62 0.17 0.27 0.87 0.64 0.11 0.18 0.89 GradDiff (KLR) Liu et al. (2022) 0.65 0.16 0.26 0.88 0.67 0.13 0.21 0.89 NPO Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.60 0.66 0.63 0.89 0.61 0.66 0.63 0.93 NPO (KLR) Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.59 0.66 0.62 0.93 0.61 0.66 0.63 0.94 

RMU Li et al. (2024) 0.60 0.25 0.35 0.88 0.62 0.16 0.26 0.89 RMU (KLR) Li et al. (2024) 0.66 0.17 0.27 0.92 0.67 0.10 0.17 0.87 SimNPO Fan et al. (2024) 0.62 0.31 0.41 0.92 0.64 0.28 0.39 0.90 SimNPO (KLR) Fan et al. (2024) 0.65 0.34 0.45 0.89 0.67 0.32 0.43 0.89 UNDIAL Dong et al. (2025) 0.61 0.70 0.65 0.93 0.63 0.71 0.67 0.90 GUARD-IT 0.65 0.68 0.66 0.87 0.66 0.66 0.66 0.83 

forget05 

GradDiff Liu et al. (2022) 0.60 0.29 0.39 0.89 0.62 0.24 0.34 0.88 GradDiff (KLR) Liu et al. (2022) 0.64 0.23 0.34 0.88 0.67 0.19 0.29 0.86 NPO Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.51 0.70 0.59 0.93 0.52 0.70 0.60 0.92 NPO (KLR) Zhang et al. (2024a) 0.46 0.71 0.56 0.94 0.46 0.72 0.56 0.94 

RMU Li et al. (2024) 0.57 0.36 0.44 0.88 0.58 0.31 0.40 0.88 RMU (KLR) Li et al. (2024) 0.63 0.28 0.39 0.90 0.66 0.21 0.32 0.85 SimNPO Fan et al. (2024) 0.60 0.39 0.48 0.91 0.62 0.38 0.47 0.90 SimNPO (KLR) Fan et al. (2024) 0.63 0.42 0.50 0.89 0.66 0.41 0.51 0.88 UNDIAL Dong et al. (2025) 0.63 0.70 0.66 0.86 0.65 0.71 0.68 0.83 GUARD-IT 0.64 0.59 0.62 0.80 0.66 0.56 0.61 0.84